UGRC 221
AFRICAN ART, ITS PHILOSOPHY AND
CRITICISM

Introduction
Dr. Irene Appeaning Addo

Week 1
Course Outline

Introduction to the course
Three Credit Course
Two Hours of Lectures
Lecture Time: TBA
Venue: Online
Course Description & Aims
To appreciate that there are different types of art in Africa, with peculiar
characteristics within geographic and cultural areas, with their own styles
and themes that identify them as African.
Assessment
Interim Assessment (30%) – Gender and Introduction to African Studies
Assignments and group work (20%)
Examination (50%) - Slide identification (Name, Ethnic Group, Function)
See Survey Handout and lecture slides, Quizzes, Essays
Reading packet is available online
Survey handout is available online
Video links available

Africa – the continent of study

Introduction
Read course outline available online

Watch Episodes 3) Gift of the Nile, 4) The
Kingdom of Kush, and 5) The Rise of Aksum of
the BBC World News nine-part series on Africa
based on UNESCOs “General History of Africa”
book collection, and Tim Dunn’s “The Birth of
Art”.
Based on your own experience and observations
What is African art?

Can you name some of the types of African art?

Types of African Art - Sculpture
•
•
•
•

•

•

Pair of twin figures (ere ibeji)
Yoruba, Nigeria
Late 19th / early 20th century
Wood, pigment, beads, cowries'
shells; 35cm and 37.5cm
They represent deceased twin
children. The Yoruba believe
twins share one soul, if a twin
dies, a figure is carved to please
the spirit of the deceased.
If neglected, its spirit of the dead
twin might become offended or
feel abandoned, and invite the
soul of the living twin sibling to
leave the material world to join it
in “the beyond.”

Types of African Art - Textiles
•
•
•
•
•
•

Fon, Republic of Benin
A royal war tunic (kansawu),
19th century
Embroided cloth,
Height 87cm
Worn by the king and important male
and female military leaders in battle.

Types of African Art – Textiles
•
•
•
•

Asafo flag, made during the colonial
period.
Fante, Ghana
A silk appliqué, length 1.35cm.
One of the flags seized by the District
Commissioner during the 1887
conflict at Mumford. An elephant
representing Dentsefo pulling down a
palm tree with Tuafo as the bird
perching on top of it.

Types of African Art- Beadworks

•

•
•
•
•

Beaded panel, (obheshwana)
Zulu, Nongoma region, South
Africa
About mid-late 20th century
Glass beads, yarn, plastic
thread, cotton thread
Length - 24.5cm
Created by young women for
their own adornment or as gifts
for their male suitors.

Types of African Art - Basketry
•
•
•
•

Buganda, Uganda
A basket with a pointed lid from
Kigesi District, collected in 1938-39
height 173/8 (44cm)
The shape compliments the coneshaped roofs and woven
substructure of court architecture

Types of African Art - Pottery

•
•
•
•
•

Pot representing an ancestral
spirit
Ga’anda peoples, Nigeria
59.7cm
Terracotta
Anthropomorphic features

Types of African Art – Adornment/Regalia
•
•
•
•

•

King (oba)
Edo, Kingdom of Benin, Nigeria
Dressed in coral regalia during a
palace ceremony in 1964.
The red coral resembles blood, the
beads may recall the deadly power of
the king and the close kin-like bond
between the king and the populace
Also coral comes from the sea. Its use
symbolizes the oba’s affiliation with
Olokun, god of the waters.

Types of African Art - Masks
•
•
•

•

•

Mask (Ngaady amwash)
Kuba people, DRC, 19th century
This is one of the three most
important three royal head pieces
for masquerades in Nsheng. Her face
is entirely covered with bold
geometric designs. Black and white
triangles across the forehead,
temples and lower face represent the
black stones of the hearth and
domesticity.
A carved wooden face mask with
narrow eye-slits that allow the
wearer to see. A wig of raffia cloth
and cowries are placed on top in a
cap form.
Made from pigments, beads, cowrie
shells, fiber, 33cm

Types of African Art – Performance, Masquerading

Poro masquerade during
commemorative funeral
Rites. Liberia, Sierra Leone

Types of African Art - Wall Painting

•
•
•
•

Painted house
Nubia (Southern Egypt)
Photographed 1960s
Domestic architecture was decorated
by women who painted the walls of
interior courtyards with delicate
polychrome patterns similar to those
of textile and jewelry.

Types of African Art - Assemblage

•
•
•

Atano shrine, Asante, Kumasi,
Ghana
Photographed 1976
The altar contains a variety of
terracotta sculptures, swords,
Akuaba figures, brass bowls and
Ideal milk tins.

What are some of the materials used to create African
art?

What are some of the functions or uses of African art?

The following slides give you an idea of the range of the
different forms of works that constitute part of African
art, their features,
and

Please take note and observe the following
•The form of the work (flat or three dimensional)

•Shape (geometric or organic)
•Colour
•Texture

Saltcellar, Sapi,
Sierra Leone, ivory

Ancient Mother Figures,
Senufo, Mali/Ivory Coast,
wood

Coffin, Paa Joe’s workshop, Ga, Accra,
Ghana, wood.

Ibeji (twin) figures

Ntadi (funerary figure).
Mboma 19th Century.
Steatite H. 23” (53.4 cm)
Lukasa (initiation emblem).
Luba late 19th – 20th century. Wood and beads

Kota Reliquary Figure, Gabon,
brass and copper.

For Those Left Behind, Willie Bester, South Africa, recycled metal

Motorbike, Ghana, recycled metals

Ogboni society member
wearing an edan, pair of
figures, Yoruba, Nigeria.

Edan, brass, Yoruba, Nigeria.

Throne and footstool of Nsangu, King of
Bamum, ca 1870, Cameroon, wood,
textile, glass beads, cowrie shells.

Kuba king in state dress, DRC. Raised
dais covered with skins, cowries and
patterned mats. The principal element is
his tunic made of interlaced strips of
raffia cloth covered with abundant beads.

Asen altar, Lome, Togo

Akan adinkra
symbols

Different
adinkra symbols
stamped on
cloth, Asante,
Akan, Ghana

Dwennimmen

Osram Ne
Nsoromma

Drawing from Stereoscope, William
Kentridge, South Africa, charcoal, pastel,
and colored pencil on paper

Ci Wara Masquerade, Bamana,
Mali.

Fancy Dress performance, Fante,
Saltpond, Ghana.

Gbon Masquerade, Poro Society, Senufo, La
Côte D’Ivoire.

One of a Pair of Double-Cylinder
Bracelets, ivory, Yoruba, Owo, Nigeria.

Luba stool, DRC, wood.

Menkaure and Khamerernebty, from
the funerary complex of Menkaure,
Giza, stone, Egypt, 2490 – 2472 BC.

Ndop for Shyaam aMbul-ANgoong, 18th C Kuba, DRC,
wood.

Kponyungo, Senufo, Mali/La Côte
D’Ivoire, wood.

Cylindrical terracotta head, IleIfe, Nigeria, 13th – 14th
Century.

Royal Couple, Papa Ibra Tall,
Senegal, tapestry

Textile, Kuba, DRC, raffia, cut-pile embroidery

Untitled, Seydou Keita, photograph.

Untitled, Skunder Boghossian, Ethiopia, oil on canvas with collage.

Igbo mbari, Nigeria.

Having seen a variety of African art works,
Can you rewrite your earlier definition,
description of what African art is?

African art is art made in Africa, by Africans or Africans
in the Diaspora with African themes.

Can you add a sentence or two to this?

A vast variety of art exist on the continent with some
common characteristics/features

Summary of some common qualities that make an African
art work successful
▪ Usually finely and smoothly finished.

▪They are polished if the material requires it to.
▪ There is regularity of form, pattern, or evenness.
▪ It is usually upright or straight.
▪ It is balanced, or have a symmetry of feeling when possible.
▪ There is discreet use of patterns to enliven the surface.
▪ Usually in a complete form.
▪ Should be intact, meaning, its not marred by cracks or
breaks.

Summary of some common qualities that make a work
successful
Has a clear definition of each part, so that the detail of each
part is recognizable.

Appearance of newness – associated with youth and vigor.
There is variety and innovation (because they are handmade
and sometimes for specific functions).
They have meaning, represent ideas, and communicate.

A work may have one or two or several of these qualities.

What are the Materials for Making Art?
• Include wood, stone, woven and printed fabrics, clay, ivory, metals
(iron, bronze, brass and gold), shells, animal skin and leather,
local pigments (organic and inorganic), some imported materials,
etc. with local and imported tools.
• Some are in mixed media (assemblage) such as shrine figures,
minkisi (Kongo, Central Africa), are primarily containers – ceramic
vessels, gourds, animal horns, shells, bundles or any object that
contains spiritually charged substances.
• Some tools used include adze, hammer, anvil, knives, chisels, etc.
• Finishing techniques include, drawing, painting, burnishing,
scrapping, incisions, drilling, joinery, polishing, painting, firing or
baking, and many more.

Who makes art in Africa?

Who is the artist in Africa?
• Traditional Craftsmen and Women/Artists
• Someone with special abilities from God. Among the Mande they are acknowledged
for their unique abilities, and this sets them apart from the rest of the community.
Their distinctiveness is manifest within a set of complex social, spiritual and political
spheres.
• People who can transform raw materials into finished products and images.
• They occupy special positions – sometimes respected, and in other cases despised/
feared.
• They possess special powers/ favours from the gods and hear their instructions.
• He/she is a creator.
• Often are part-time workers (some work on their farms during the farming season and
produce art after the harvest; some have other occupations).
• Records and documents ideas and events.
• Works on commissions from patrons.
• Sometimes organized to live in guilds, villages.
• Traditional training is informal (apprenticeship).
• Art production is sometimes gendered in certain communities.

Who is the artist in Africa?
• Traditional Artists

Carver, Ahwia, Ghana

Almighty God Artworks (a self-trained
street shop of Kwame Akoto), Kumasi,
Ghana.

The role of the artist within communities

• What is the role of the artist in the community?
– Healer
– Mediator
– Narrator of history
– Translates traditional ideas, philosophy, beliefs etc. into
visual forms.
– Produces art and craft works.
– Domestic and farm implements, etc.
– Produces royal regalia.
– Produces some household utilitarian items.

Gender Related Roles
• Male artists - their materials and products
– Males often worked in metals, wood, ivory, etc.
– African sculpture was generally produced by men. Wood
was the principal medium.
– Among the Luba (DRC), sculpture was largely made by
men in wood, bone, ivory and stone. They were also the
metal casters and blacksmiths.
– Men generally worked as blacksmiths as among the
Mande and other societies in the Western Sudan.
Woodcarving was also done by blacksmiths who were
members of a cult and controlled by this guild or caste.
– In Asante and Cameroon clay pipes in human and animal
forms were made by men.
– Can you explain
why?

Gender Related Roles
• Female artists and their materials
– Women worked in clay, fabric, beads, coiffure.
– Luba women made carved objects in dried camwood paste.
– Women produced Anyi commemorative figures in clay and Yoruba
effigy pots.
– Pottery among the Ewe communities in Ghana is made by women.
– Toureg women worked in animal skin/leather.
• Explain why?
•

Other Gendered Examples
The Female Potters and Male Blacksmiths
• Among the Bamana people in Mali, female potters marry
male blacksmiths, and this kind of marriage among
professions is also common throughout the Western Sudanic
region.
• Among the Bamana, women in the blacksmith clans own the
right to make pottery. Both potters and blacksmiths share a
similarity in the production process, in that raw materials are
from the earth and transformed by fire.
• Digging of clay is by the potters assisted by their blacksmith
husbands.
• For the Bamana people, female potters and male blacksmiths
are considered to have special knowledge and powers thus
separating them from the general public.

Other Gendered Examples
The Female Potters and Male Blacksmiths

• Variations of this pottery-blacksmith complex are found
elsewhere in West Africa.
• For example, among the Kpeenbele Senufo of La Côte d’Ivoire
women potters are married to male brass casters, and among
the Nupe of central Nigeria, a group of women potters in Bida,
who specialised in producing ceramic floor tiles were married
to male glass bead makers.
• One interesting variation is among the nomadic pastoralist
culture of the Muslim Tuareg people who for centuries
operated the trans-Saharan trading caravans.

Other gendered Examples
The Female Potters and Male Blacksmiths

• Tuareg male blacksmiths and silversmiths specialise in
producing tools, weapons, and silver jewellery.
• Their wives make portable containers of leather such as,
water bags, personal wallets, and sachets decorated colourful
embroidered appliquéd patterns and protective amulets.
• While any Tuareg woman married to a blacksmith can
manufacture leather products, the tanning of leather can be
done only by postmenopausal women.
• The Hausa men in northern Nigeria and Mande men in Mali,
are the leather specialists.

Formally Trained Artists
• The formally-trained artists receive their training from
Colleges and Universities (locally or abroad).
• Expresses the aesthetic values of the community as well as
their own artistic styles.
• Work as full-time or on part-time basis.
• Produces works for aesthetic enjoyment.
• Freedom to depart from traditional aesthetic.
• Introduce innovations and new styles.
• May adopt from other schools, cultures and traditions.
• May work in industrial establishments (textiles, jewelry,
advertising and media, ceramic factories, etc. ).
• Part of a local and sometimes international community
participating in exhibitions, talks, seminars, publishing, etc.

Other Categories of Art Produced in Africa
Modern Art
•Art works affiliated with the Western modern art movement of
the late 19th and early 20th century.
•Many were trained in art schools and colleges.
• Some of these works were influenced by traditional African art
and culture.
•New media and techniques such as painting, graphic design etc
were introduced.

•They paint landscapes, festivals, traditional outdoor activities,
portraits, produced sculpture, designed cloth, made works in
ceramics, etc. etc.
•A few copied from Western books.
•Some were influenced by independence ideologies.

Other Categories of Art Produced in Africa
Contemporary Art
• Artist who have been working in contemporary Africa from
approximately the twentieth century.
• They have the freedom in the choice of materials and not limited
traditional art materials.
• They work in mixed media.
• They engage with current socio-political and environmental
issues such as waste, corruption, etc. etc.

• Partly driven by technology and Internet.
• Do not need local recognition as they market their works online
and on virtual exhibition sites.

• Active members of the globalised community as they travel and
participate in international exhibitions, biennials and triennials.

Contemporary Artists

Butcher Boys, Jane Alexander, South Africa, 1985-1986, mixed media.

Other Categories of Art Produced in Africa
Urban Street Art
• These are works produced by self–taught or partially trained
artists living in urban areas and cities.
• They are often self employed.
• Examples of their works include signboards, portraits of
prominent people, landscapes, studio backgrounds for
portraits, etc.
• They address the visual desires of the urban population.
• Some of their art are repetitive and copied themes from
elsewhere, such as popular sportsmen and women, political
figures etc. etc.
•

Other Categories of Art Produced in Africa

Finally!…After All Those Years, Chéri Samba, DRC, 2002, acrylic and glitter
on canvas.

Other Categories of Art Produced in Africa
Tourist/Airport Art
• Tourist/Airport art
• Commercially produced art sold to tourists at
crafts markets, airports, etc.
• Aimed at providing mementos for tourists to take
away.
• These works are usually popular cultural symbols
• Produced in large quantities – commercial in
nature.

The Roles of Traditional art are changing!
This is a Bamana
Bogolanfini cloth
made by women for
the circumcision rite
of passage of young
girls and buried with
the old women.

Bogolan or Bogolanfini, Bamana, Mali, cotton.

The Roles of Traditional art are changing!

Now men sew it and sold in several craft and tourist shops and worn by both male and
females, and also as decorative works hanging in public and private spaces.

Sold as crafts in shops for tourists

Chris Seydou design

Gendered Role Reversals
Hausa Pottery
•The conversion to Islam in the nineteenth century resulted in
the Muslim practice of female seclusion being imposed on
Hausa women of childbearing age, which greatly affected their
mobility.
•Religious and economic factors seems to have influenced
gender role reversal in the production of Hausa pottery.
•Women were not allowed to participate in the firing and
marketing of pottery.
•Realising the financial gains, the Hausa men took advantage
of this.

Gendered Role Reversal
Hausa Pottery
•Whereas the Hausa women used an inverted mould technique to
start their pots, Hausa men used a concave mould technique,
either an upright ceramic or wooden vessels or a shallow
depression in the earth, to form the pots using a stone or ceramic
pestle-shaped beater, the potter pounds and turns the flat clay
pancake against the sides of the concave mould.
•The concave mould technique appears to have expedited the
production process by eliminating the labour intensive steps of
adding a series of clay coils to the walls of the pot.
• A single potter may be able to produce as many as 50 pots in a
day. The adoption of the concave mould technique may also be a
strategy of differentiating between men and women pottery.

Gendered Role Reversals
Hausa Pottery
•Instead of stacking the unfired pots on the ground as the
women had done, the men built large round earthen kilns, 3
feet high and about 12 feet in diameter. The kilns had
draught and stoking holes around the base.
• Large numbers of pots were carefully stacked into it so
that air and fire could circulate freely among the pots.
These mud kilns resulted in greater efficiency in the firing
process by allowing for large numbers of pots to be fired at
the same time thus reducing the percentage of breakage.
•While Hausa pottery continues to be male dominated
industry, in recent years an increasing number of women
have began to make pots.

Gendered Role Reversal
Hausa Pottery
•Whereas Hausa men took over pottery production from women in order
to produce ceramic vessels more efficiently for commercial profit, in
most parts of Africa pottery manufacture including the digging and
preparation of clay and the forming of pots and firing is the responsibility
of women.
•During the twentieth century the concave mould technique spread
widely through Hausa areas as the males temporarily relocated in or
established households in other communities.
• Hausa men have introduced important innovations into the firing
method.

•In the post-colonial period young males have been attracted to more
lucrative jobs as a result more women have been trained to make pots.
Women who were confined to the compound are now being viewed as
readymade labour force for pottery.

Gendered Role Reversal
Hausa Indigo Dyeing
•Such occupational gender role reversals were also found in
other twentieth-century Hausa art industry.
•For example, a parallel situation also existed in the indigo
dyeing industry, which like pottery was previously controlled
by women.
•Indigo dyeing has been practiced over the centuries by
female specialist in West Africa, though in some regions in
northern Nigeria among the Hausa it is done by men.
•When men took over the indigo dyeing in the nineteenth
century, they introduced technical innovations that
distinguished their production process from that of the
women.

Men and Women in Aluminum Smithing
•In the past Hausa women dyed the cloth in large ceramic
pots while the men dyers replaced the pots with cement lined
pits.
•Another example is, during the post-colonial period, Hausa
women in an aluminum smithing centre, which had always
been a male specialisation, began to take an active role in the
industry.
•While the men continued to shape the aluminum ladle
spoons through the hammering process, women decorated
them with engraved patterns.

Summary
Course Outline
What constitutes African
Art
Commonalities

Variety of Forms
Gendered art and role
reversals

UGRC 220
AFRICAN ART, ITS
PHILOSOPHY AND
CRITICISM
Head of a Queen, Yoruba,
Nigeria, terracotta

Week Two

The
Philosophy and Aesthetics
of African Art

Lecture Objectives
•

•
•
•

To understand how African life’s experiences and
beliefs influence the creation of art
To appreciate the reasons for the creation of art
The various modes for determining what is
acceptable and pleasurable in selected African
communities
Develop an aesthetic sense of looking and
appreciating a work of art or a performance

What is African philosophy?

– African philosophy can be defined as the knowledge or system of
thought based on experiences, observations, beliefs, history and
so on.
– It is bound up with a people’s spirit and constitution, and a factor
in their life history, culture and civilization.
– It is enshrined in political structure and organization, agricultural
practices, initiation rites and rituals, informal education and so on.
– It forms the guiding principles and basis for all aspects of life
including social organization, relationships, economic and political
activities and all other aspects of the entire lifestyle of a people.
– It includes ideas and ways of reasoning which are deeply
embedded and stored in oral traditions / narratives. It is often
coded in arts, proverbs and idioms upon which all aspects of the
society are based.
– It has a great impact on the forms of artistic production and styles.

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African Art
– Many African societies before European and Arabic
influences were non-scripturate.
– Representation of all forms of ideas, notions, and beliefs
were interpreted in a visual form – art, narratives, and
performances, which served as the means of documenting
ideas and histories as well as recording events.
– This ensured a balanced life with the physical and the
spiritual world.
– Oratory and other linguistic forms of art, were used to
communicate.
– This to a large extent determine the visual appearance of a
work of art.
– The work of art is therefore expected to communicate
ideas, values, beliefs etc. etc. and the aesthetic values

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African Art
•For example, this royal initiation emblem of
the Luba people of the Democratic Republic
of Congo is used in the highest stage of
initiation attained by only a few people among
the royal, namely: kings, diviners and
members of Mbudye.
•These men are seen as “men of memory”
and are regarded as genealogists, court
historians and the “traditionalist” of the
society.
•Lukasa is also the term used for the physical
emblem for the initiated elite- a memory used
to aid in assisting in the initiation ceremonies
to recall a complex body of knowledge, which
is also used in performances honouring the
king and his retinue.
•The configuration in this Lusaka (memory
board) is explained in the next slide.

Lukasa (Memory Board), Luba,
DRC, wood, beads

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African Art
and Aesthetics
• In the subsequent slides you are going to see varied examples
of
– how the history of a people, their belief system, values are
recalled in a piece of art work
– The modes of determining who is acceptable and
pleasurable, and the reasons for making certain art works
and why they should look the way they look.
• You will be required to apply your knowledge in aesthetics in
evaluating the works in the slides
• These will help in establishing a relationship between
philosophy and aesthetics, and
• Help to you with the tools to evaluate, discuss and critique a
work of art.

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African
Art - Aesthetics
– Aesthetics is the branch of philosophy which has tried to
answer questions such as “what is art and beauty?”
• Many African artists deal with conceptions, and we should
be careful perhaps not to confuse the desire of accuracy
of religious detail with accuracy of "realistic" detail.
• In a traditional religious art, the objects are symbolic
statements of attributes. Both the artist and public are
content; likeness to life is not considered at all or if
considered it is to a negligible degree.
• Art served as an avenue for the expression of values,
beliefs, and aesthetics.
• It is a system of determining what is good and visually
pleasurable and acceptable.
• Aesthetics is guided by a set of codes based on religion,
philosophy and taste.
• It is guided by what impact the object has on one’s
emotion, sight, feelings etc. etc.
Dance Wand in honor of Eshu, Yoruba,
Nigeria, wood, indigo dye, beads

African Philosophy and Its impact on African Art Aesthetics
– The aesthetic value of a given work of art is determined by its
functionality, symbolic and visual pleasure.
– Appropriateness becomes an important criterion of aesthetic value
and judgment, for instance, mourning colours for a funeral cloth,
colours for outdooring, joyous occasions, adolescent colours etc..
– Beauty is the central notion in African aesthetics but the scope of its
application is much wider and deeper in the African aesthetic
experience and valuation.

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African Art Aesthetics
• Why should we so anxiously demand resemblance
to natural shapes? The more an artist is capable,
the more he will attach greater importance to
rhythm of one kind or another and less importance
to photographic likeness. He will be content with a
few amazing marks. An artist may not wish to give
us a photograph of the battle field taken from an
airplane but may simply states facts concerning the
battle.
• We will be quite in error if we bring to our
estimation of its value any judgment concerning its
degree of "likeness" to the natural rhythms and
arrangements of parts of the body. The movement
and arrangements of these rhythms are balanced
among themselves.
• Our judgment is considerably influenced by our
intellectual interest. The absolute value is, of
course, gauged by reference to a general balancing
of all aesthetic outlooks - movement, shape, form,
color, planes, lines, rhythm and so on.

Figure, Mumuye, Nigeria,
wood

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African Art Aesthetics
• An Asante wood carver for example, may
produce a figure a European painter may have
taken delight in painting, but the motives of
reproduction are very distinct.
• To the African he/she does not even notice
that the sculpture is disproportionate, because
the head claims the major part of the
attention of the artist or the buttocks or sexual
organs and so on as that may the the places of
emphasis.
• The Asante favours a restrained naturalism in
sculptural art.
• Carvings should present images that could be
interpreted in a manner consistent with
popular themes in traditional knowledge and
beliefs to the Asante culture.
• There is the believe that good art ‘portrays the
world as it is’.
• Asante aesthetic tastes closely articulates
Asante moral and social values.

Mother and Child, Asante,
Akan, Ghana, wood

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African Art Aesthetics
An Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects
In the following slides, you are going to apply your knowledge in
aesthetic appreciation and write short notes explaining how do
these parts of the objects, for example,
•Line(s),
•shape,
•colour
•volume, size
•texture
•Finish – smooth, rough, polished etc. etc.
•Balance
•Form
Impact on your senses of
•Sight
•Emotions
•Feelings
•Hearing
•Memory

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African Art Aesthetics
An Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects
Some characteristics
of aesthetics for
discussion include:
– Clarity of form and
detail, complexity of
composition, balance
and symmetry,
smoothness of finish.

Cup, Kuba, DRC, wood

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African Art Aesthetics
An Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects
Some characteristics of
aesthetics include:
– Each work of art evokes
both pleasing and nonpleasing associations,
which are determined by
the culture to which it
belongs.
•For example

•ideal womanhood
•a strong, mature woman
•the patron of women

•the woman who has given
birth to many children.

D’mba Mask, Baga, Guinea,
wood, copper nails, fabric, fiber

African Philosophy and Its Impact on African Art - Aesthetics
An Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects
– The art of a people can only be understood against the background of the
entire culture of the people
– Therefore as discussed above it is important to understand their philosophy,
religion, culture and history.
– Do you understand and know why these works below look the way they are?
– Why?
The Dahomey
Kingdom

Aesthetics/Visual Analysis of selected objects
•What does this figure tell you? Is it a male of a
female? What visual aspects tells you of its gender?
•Does the kind of finish do anything to your eyes,
mind?
•What impression does the stature give you
•Do the decorations and lines do anything to your
sight?
•What about colour?
•Can you guess the type of objects/symbols in his/her
hand?
•What do all these have on your sight, emotions,
feelings, hearing on your mind and perception. In
sum does your answers to these questions help
you make a judgment on the quality of the work?

Memorial Figure, Bembe, DRC,
wood, shell

Aesthetics/Visual Analysis of selected objects
•What does this figure tell you? Is it a male of a
female?
•What visual aspects/decorations tells you of its
gender?
•Does the kind of finish do anything to your eyes,
mind?
•What impression does the shape of the head
give you?
•Do the decorations - lines and shapes do
anything to your sight?
•How have the eyes been treated?
•What about colour?
•What does the treatment of the eyes remind you
of?
•Are the features on the face balanced?

Mblo, portrait mask, Baule, Ivory
Coast and Ghana, wood

•What do all these have on your sight,
emotions, feelings, hearing on your mind and
perception. In sum does your answers to
these questions help you make a judgment on
the quality of the work?

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects
•What do these figures tell you? Who do you think
they are? What do you think is their relationship?
•Does the kind of finish do anything to your eyes,
mind?
•What material do you think they were made in?
•What impression do they give you?
•Do their wigs/head coverings, clothing do
anything to your sight?
•What physical features distinguish them?
•What impression does their posture give you?
•What do all these have on your sight,
emotions, feelings, hearing on your mind and
perception. In sum does your answers to
these questions help you make a judgment on
the quality of the work?
Menkaure and Khamerernebty, from
the Funerary Complex of Menkaure,
Giza, Egypt, greywacke

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects
•What does the shape of this object tell you?
•What visual aspects and decorations tell
you?
•What impression does the shape give you?
•Does the kind of finish do anything to your
eyes, mind?
•Do the decorations - lines and other patterns
do anything to how you perceive it?
•Doe the object look balanced?
•What about colour?
•Can you guess its use?
•What impression does the form/shape tell
you?
•What do all these have on your sight,
emotions, feelings, hearing on your mind
and perception. In sum does your
answers to these questions help you
make a judgment on the quality of the
work?
Vessel, Nupe, Nigeria, terracotta, metal

Aesthetics/Visual Analysis of selected objects

Stool, Asante, Ghana, wood

What do all these have on your
sight, emotions, feelings, hearing
on your mind and perception. In
sum does your answers to these
questions help you make a
judgment on the quality of the
work?

•What does the shape of this object
tell you?
•What do you think it can be used for?
•What does the visual aspects and
decorations tell you?
•Does the kind of finish do anything to
your eyes, mind?
•What impression does the shape
give you?
•Do the decorations - lines and other
patterns do anything to how you see
it?
•Does the object look balanced?
•What about colour?

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects

Painted House, Wei Minah Motaung, Basotho,
Lesotho
What do all these have on your sight,
emotions, feelings, hearing on your
mind and perception. In sum does
your answers to these questions help
you make a judgment on the quality of
the work?

•What does the shape of this
object tell you?
•What do you think it is used for?
•What does the visual aspects and
decorations tell you?
•Does the kind of finish, colour,
etc. do anything to your eyes,
emotions, impressions, mind,
etc.?
•What impression does the shape
give you?
•Do the decorations - lines and
other patterns do anything to how
you see it?
•What impression does the
form/shape tell you?

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects

What Future for Our Art?, Chéri Samba,
DRC, 1997, acrylic and glitter on canvas
What do all these have on your sight,
emotions, feelings, hearing on your
mind and perception. In sum does
your answers to these questions help
you make a judgment on the quality of
the work?

•What art work is this?
•Can you give a detailed description
of what it contains?
•Do the objects in it tell you anything
or communicate any message?
•What do the people in the work
seem to be doing?
•What impression do the colours,
shapes, lines, etc. do to your eyes,
emotions, mind, etc.?
•Do the writings do anything to how
you see it and your understanding?
•What impression does the form give
you?

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects

Figures with Camel, Tassili N'Ajjer Region,
Algeria, pigment on rock
What do all these have on your sight,
emotions, feelings, hearing on your
mind and perception. In sum does
your answers to these questions help
you make a judgment on the quality of
the work?

•What does this photograph tell you?
•What do you think it was used for?
•Can you describe the content of the
photograph?
•What does the visual aspects and
decorations tell you?
•Does the kind of finish do anything
to your eyes, mind?
•What impression do the shapes of
the animals give you?
•Do the overall picture look
balanced?
•Can you guess its use?
•What impression does the whole
picture tell you?

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects
•What does this photograph tell you?
•What do you think it was used for?
•Can you describe the content of the
photograph?
•What does the visual aspects and
decorations tell you?
•Does the kind of finish do anything to
your eyes, mind?
•What can you say about the livestock
in the middle of the work?
•Do the overall picture look balanced?
•What about colour?
•Can you guess its use?
•What impression does the whole
picture tell you?

Garden Scene, Nebamun's Tomb,
Thebes, Egypt, fresco secco

What do all these have on your sight,
emotions, feelings, hearing on your mind
and perception. In sum does your
answers to these questions help you
make a judgment on the quality of the
work?

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects
•What does this photograph tell you?
•What do you think it was used for?
•What material was this made out of?
•Can you describe the content of this?
•What do the subjects tell you about?
•Do the different sizes of the images tell you
anything?
•What impression do the shapes of the animals give
you?
•Do the overall picture look balanced?
•What about colour?
•Can you guess what its use was for?
•What impression does the whole picture tell you?

Palette of Narmer, Egypt, slate
What do all these have on your sight, emotions, feelings,
hearing on your mind and perception. In sum does your
answers to these questions help you make a judgment or
enables you to critique the quality of the work?

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects
•What does this photograph tell you?
•What material was this made out of?
•Can you describe the content of the
photograph?
•What general impression does the
lines, colour, shapes etc. etc give
you?
•What feeling does it create in your
mind?
•What does the visual aspects,
subjects and decorations tell you?
•Do the different sizes of the images
Battle of Adwa, Qes Adamu
tell you anything?
Tesfaw, Ethiopia, c. 2000, acrylic
•Does the kind of finish do anything to
on cloth
your eyes, mind?
•Do the overall picture look balanced?
•What about colour?
What do all these overall have on your
•What impression does the whole
sight, emotions, feelings, on your mind and
picture tell you?
perception. In sum does your answers to
these questions help you make a judgment
or help you critique on the quality of the
work?

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects

Je Antelope Masquerade, Guro, Ivory Coast
What do all these have on your sight,
emotions, feelings, hearing, on your mind and
perception. In sum does your answers to
these questions help you make a judgment or
be able to criticize the work?

•What does this photograph
tell you?
•What do you think they are
doing?
•What material was this
made out of?
•Can you describe the what it
communicates to your eyes
and emotions?
•What is your general
impression of the lines,
movement, colour, shapes
etc. etc give you?
•What impression/feeling
does it create in your mind?
•Do the overall picture look
balanced?

Aesthetic/Visual Analysis of selected objects

•What is happening above?
•What do you think they are doing?
•What material are these made out of?
•Can you describe the what it communicates to your eyes and emotions?
•What is your general impression from the lines, movement, colour, shapes etc. etc it
gives you?
•What feeling does it create in your mind?
•Does the colour give you a hint of the geographic area?
•What impression does the whole picture give you?

Aesthetics of the Yoruba
People of SW Nigeria

*** Read
Drewal, Henry John and John
Pemberton III with Rowland
Abiodun. “The Yoruba World” In
Yoruba: Nine Centuries of Art and
Thought. pp. 13-44. NY: Abrams,
1989.
And
***Abiodun, Rowland. “African
Aesthetics.” Journal of Aesthetic
Education 35 (2001) 4: 15-23.
The subsequent slides and the
questions are intended to test
your understanding from the
reading of these two texts.

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria

Ancient Ife
Ile-Ife
“the Navel of the World”
Where creation took place
Where the tradition of kingship began

Yoruba Cosmos:
aye is the visible world
Orun represents the invisible world
Oduduwa & Obatala are divinities
Orisa are deities

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria
•

Object and Context: Aesthetics and Character
– Yoruba aesthetics:
• The concept Yoruba aesthetics is in establishing a relationship between
the iwa (character/ existence) and ewa (beauty).
• The Yoruba artist seeks to realize completely the identity and character of
his subject as implied in the phrase - to beautify through artistic activity.
• To overlook this important prerequisite for beauty and to favor external
criteria or explanations instead will rob us of the full understanding of
Yoruba art and the Yoruba aesthetic universe.
• Criticism emanates from the highest level of aesthetic consciousness.
• Not everyone can be an art critic, though there is no formal training per
se, but it requires significant and conscious effort to acquire. One acquires
experience and expertise by “walking with the elders.”

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria

What is ase?

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria
Ase?

•Olodumare gave ase to everything.
•Existence is dependent on it.
•It is the power to make things happen and change.

•A person, who through training, experience and
initiation, knows how to use and manipulate the ase in
things.
•Recognition of the unique ase of individuals and orisa
structures society and its relationship with the other
world – the aye with the orun.

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria

Head of a Queen, Yoruba, Nigeria, terracotta
ori ade - the outer head.

Cylindrical Head, Yoruba, Nigeria,
terracotta, ori inu – inner head

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria

Ifa Divination Tray, Yoruba, Nigeria, wood
Eshu
What features of this divination tray will qualify it in Youruba aesthetics
– form, meaning, function, visual appeal, content, etc. etc.?

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria

THE PAVEMENT PERIOD
c. 1000-1400 BC

Ritual Vessel, Yoruba, Nigeria, terracotta

Based on your reading and answers on the
previous slides, can you comment on this pot
and the two figures to the right of it?

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria

The head is said to
represent the
Usurper Lajuwa,
Yoruba, Ile-Ife
Nigeria, terracotta

What role does the head play in
Yoruba aesthetics?
Can you also comment on the
form, decoration, shape, etc. of
this head. Can you do both a
visual and esthetic analysis of
this head?

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria
THE PAVEMENT
PERIOD
c. 1000-1400 BC
What role does the head play in
Yoruba aesthetics?
Can you also comment on the
material, form, decoration,
shape, etc. of this head. Can
you do both a visual a esthetic
analysis of this head? What do
the holes around the hairline tell
you?

Head, Yoruba, Nigeria, brass

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria
The pavement Period c. 1000 – 1400 BC
Do the two
photographs here
and your reading of
the texts give you a
clue to doing an
aesthetic and visual
analysis of the head
on the left and right
sides?

Oba, Yoruba,
Nigeria,
1977
Head, Yoruba, Nigeria, brass

Aesthetics of the Yoruba People of SW Nigeria

What is the photograph on
the right? Your reading of the
texts will give you a clue to
this and help you in doing an
aesthetic and visual analysis
of this image.

Crown (ade) for an oba,
Yoruba, Nigeria, cloth,
Venetian glass beads

Some characteristics of aesthetics include:
In sumary
– Art is a way of representing the seen and unseen.
– It gives physical presence to, and represents the ancestors, gods and deities as
well as heroes, warriors and leaders of the society.
Chibinda Ilunga, warrior
hero of Chokwe, Angola

Egungun, ancestral spirit of
Yoruba, Nigeria

Some characteristics of aesthetics include:
– The aesthetic aspect of art works help structure the society
– These art works guide the community regarding laws, beliefs, values.

Egungun Masqueraders, Yoruba, Nigeria

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Week 8
Summary
We have described an African work of art.
Discussed what is African philosophy?
What constituents African philosophy?
Established the relationship between African
philosophy and art?
Discussed what aesthetics is.
Highlighted some characteristics of African aesthetics
citing examples from the Akan and Yoruba?
And finally how their philosophy, aesthetic preferences
influence artistic creativity
Made attempts at aesthetic analysis and criticism.

UGRC 221
AFRICAN ART, ITS
PHILOSOPHY AND
CRITICISM

Week Three

The History of African Art History

Lecture Objectives
• To explore the trajectory of the development of African art as an academic
discipline from the records of the early European travellers and explorers,
and Arabic writings, colonial period records in archives, museums and other
sources of information to its current study as an academic discipline.
• To guide students to understand that the discipline includes the study of
Subjects (what art objects you study), and the ‘Methods’ (what you use
to study them) in their social, political, religious and other contexts and
stylistic analysis.
• Present a brief overview on the methodological approaches employed in
the study of art history.
• Discuss the relationship between art history and movements such as
modernism, decolonialization, postmodernism, contemporary art and others.

Introduction
– African art history is a relatively new field of study
• The traditional knowledge on art is contained in oral histories
and narratives
• Sources of this were the elderly people, spokespersons, family
and clan heads, etc.
• Annual festivals, performances, narratives, their philosophy and
beliefs
– Though African art was presented previously as ethnographic by
European writers – focusing on functions, use, “curiosities,” etc., it is
now studied as part of the discipline of art history, and part of a
global academic discipline and heritage.
– African art is now found in many museums, and several academic
institutions that study art history have African art as part of their
collections and African art history in their curricula.
The next slides are just a few of the kind of African art that attracted
the study of African art as an academic discipline.

Lukwakogo, Bwami
Society mask, Lega,
Congo. Early 20th century.
Wood, pigment & fibber.
Knife Case, Kongo-Portuguese, DRC or
Angola, 16th century, ivory

Textile, Kongo, Early 17th
century, Raffia.

Details, Oliphants, Kongo-Portuguese, DRC, 16th century, ivory.

Saltcellar, Sapi-Portuguese,
Sierra Leone, c. 1490-1530,
ivory.
•British Museum

Introduction
• The discipline of African art history as it is today has undergone
fundamental changes over the last few decades.
• The changes have been varied and sometimes occurring in overlapping
situations – including situational, historical, social and political – these
have all occurred due to development and changes in the discipline.
• Art history has itself become more open, interrogative (questioning), and
self-critical than ever before.

• Some methods of analysis within “European art history methods” cannot
be avoided because the issues that are at stake and their examination
are undoubtedly complex, and requires some specialized concepts that
should be used in specific rigorous ways.

Introduction
• The art of a place reflects the general worldview of the period it was
made.
– This means that the art of an era and the society, which produced it,
are integrally bound together.
– This is one defining characteristic of current scholarship within the
discipline of art history, and is arguably the premier methodological –
and ideological – configuration of modern art history.

Early 14th–19th century accounts and records
• What were the methodologies, sources of information, approaches and biases
in the early collection of information on Africa’s art?
– The sources were based on observations from European traders and
explorers from their ships and commercial contacts with the local people up
to 17th century.
– More European records became available from 18th – 20th century, which
were written by trading merchants, European officials in the forts and
castles along the west African, southern and south eastern Africa coasts;
still mainly based on European observations and viewpoints. These were
also shared among other interested Europeans.
– Traders/adventurers may have used African interpreters - information was
oral, not written (except for Egypt).
– Egyptian hieroglyphs could not be read until the 1820s
– Objects were often symbolic, contained information, messages, the
philosophy, beliefs, history, etc. of the people who produced them.

– Arabic manuscripts and literature from the savanna belt (Timbuktu) was
available, but was not easily read by Europeans. There were also other
manuscripts from Ethiopia, East African coast including, Kenya and
Tanzania.
– African art studies started with art works collected and sent to Europe as
souvenirs and mementos of proof of European travels and truthfulness of
their expeditions from the fifteenth to the nineteenth century.

– Art was described as crafts mainly for utilitarian daily uses including rites,
rituals and ceremonies, and in governance.
– Sometimes referred to as “fetishes”.

– Presented as part of the descriptions of the life and culture of Africa in
historical accounts, dairies, letters etc. These are called primary sources.
– Information available to us include accompanying records of items
purchased, gifts given to Europeans to cement relations, or commissioned
by European traders and merchants and taken to Europe and kept in
cabinets of wonder, sent to museums, and/or kept in private homes.

European “cabinet of wonder” containing various art works collected by their employee
during their travels for their employers and merchant companies.

Early 14th – 19th century accounts and records
• In the 16th – 18th centuries, Africa
continued to be known as a place of
powerful kings and lavish courts. In
that era of sea exploration, many
European travelers to Africa
compared the continent’s court
architecture and thriving cities
favorably with the best of Europe.

Saltcellar, Sapi-Portuguese, Sierra
Leone, c. 1490-1530, ivory

• The Europeans also took away to
their home countries ivory works,
textiles, and other art works that
eventually found their way into the
collections of the most distinguished
art patrons and artists of Europe,
such as the Medici family and
Albrecht Dürer.

• Even during the horrors of the slave trade, which
resulted in inconceivable personal suffering,
massive political instability in much of Africa, and
the transportation of a significant proportion of
Africa’s own essential labour force to the
Americas to provide labour for the West’s
industrialization drive—outside observers
continued to hold highly favorable views of Africa
and its arts.
• These generally positive images of Africa
changed dramatically in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries being accelerated by
slavery and other European misconceptions.
• The Western desire for greater control over
Africa’s trade partners, religious beliefs, and
political engagements led to an era of widespread
colonial expansion.
•African slaves took some of their artistic heritage
with them to the Americas and Europe.

• Missionaries were also responsible for some of
the misinformation and negative attitude
towards art.
• In the process of evangelizing and conversion,
they required Africans separated themselves
from traditional art by voluntarily giving them
up or destroying those in their possession.

• Colonial overlords sought to repress art as it
functioned to support certain traditional
institutions, which were in contravention to
colonial policies and agenda.

War booty by the British soldiers
after their punitive expedition to
the Oba’s palace in Benin,
Nigeria in 1897

• British examples include the invasion of
Asantehene’s palace in Kumasi (1874), Punitive
Expedition on the Benin palace in Nigeria
(1897), and banning aspects of Fante asafo arts
in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

• Wealthy state treasuries of kingdoms such as Benin, Asante, and
Dahomey (and their accumulated arts) were taken to Europe as
war booty following the defeat of their rulers by European forces
and formed the basis for the rich collections of newly-founded
ethnographic museums.
• In the literature of the time, the broad regional influences of
these kingdoms were often played down in favour of narrow
ethnic identities. Regional dialects of larger language groups in
turn became erroneously identified as distinct fixed languages,
each supposedly unique to a separate “tribe” and artistic
“style.”
• “Tribalism” became the predominant framework within which the
continent’s art production was discussed, and to some extent
this model of the distinctive ethnic group (“tribe”) survives in
some parts and even today in some African countries use this
derogative word in reference to their ethnic groups.

19th – 20th Century Records
• These records were written by colonial officials including, Italians, Portuguese,
English, French and German.
• Information on Africa’s art can also be found in Christian religious accounts on
evangelization and Christianizing the “heathen people”, and various historical
accounts on the church history of the major Christian denominations.
• Islamic accounts contain a rich source of information on Africa’s history since
their activities in the Sudanic and northern part of the continent predated the
arrival of the Europeans and these records were documented.

• Information on African art can also be found in anthropological accounts by
various European officers who were either appointed to the colonies or
visited.
• Travelogues and accounts of European explorers seeking new frontiers also
provide us with some information.
• Historical accounts by Europeans who sought to give various information to
the European compatriots on their observations and understanding of the
African continent.

• During this period various kinds of surveys and explorations were carried out
to asses the resources of the continent and they were accompanied with
reports.
• Letters written by representatives of European monarchs and governments
are also a rich source of information.

• Some information are also found in archival documents, colonial laws and
ordinances.
• Works seized, stolen, excavated, received as gifts etc. commissioned and
sent to Europe to be kept in private homes and museums provide us with
useful information.
• Some were taken away with accompanying documents.
• However, there are some problems with the information in the
documentation on the collections – including, no names of the artists,
provenance usually problematic, the use assigned to the art are sometimes
questionable, and several others.

• In 1881 the idea that African art must have a symbolic significance was
considered in place of the primitive image it had previously had. In Germany,
K. T. Preuss (1904-5), broke new grounds in the study of the content of art.
• Interest revived in the following decades of the twentieth century as
anthropologists, archaeologists, and ethnographers started to take an interest
in the various arts of the continent.

• Serious studies of African art then began in the second half of the twentieth
century.
• In the twentieth century the study of art history started to emerge as a
discipline with European scholars spearheading the field.
• The study has now evolved through different approaches including
ethnographic, anthropological, philosophical and descriptive works.

•

Since then the discipline has continued to evolve through several phases
with different methodological approaches.

The Development of African Art as Art Studies
• The discipline of African art studies is still in its infancy and therefore fraught
with initial difficulties in method and scope. Advances made to date are
remarkable even though considerable gaps remain.
• The discipline has emerged with some interesting insights resulting from
adaptations and applications of models from different disciplines; among
them art history, history, anthropology, ethnology, and archaeology, and has
attracted a wide spectrum of scholarly interests.
• This prompted scholars from diverse backgrounds, disciplines, and
nationalities to participate in this new multi-disciplinary knowledge creation
and dissemination.
• The scholars include anthropologists such as Melville Herskovits, Franz Boas,
(anthropologists) and others, Roy Sieber and Arnold Rubin are all leading
scholars in this regard.
• The study of African art has since moved beyond the early anthropological
approach in the 1960s, which identified art with ethnicity.
• Roy Seiber received the first Ph.D. in African art history in 1957 from the
University of Indiana in Bloomington.

Roy Sieber

Working in Nigeria, 1958

Some scholars and their contributions from 1957-1970s
Some other scholars and their interests are as follows

Roy Sieber and Arnold Rubin
• They investigated style as defined by multiple factors in relation
to specific sub-cultural or broader regional groupings

• Includes household arts and textiles as “art”
William Bascom
• Outlined some style groupings, including period, sub-styles,
individual, regional, craft, etc.
Rene Bravmann
• Explored the interaction of groups and their effect on art

The early journals such as African Arts encouraged the publication of
serious scholarship and added a wide range of visual documentation
of African art. Other journals also developed an interest in African art
because the subjects discussed span across disciplines.

“Mangbetu” Art

Some scholars and their contributions from 1957-1970s
• Other studies such as architectural histories have also
developed into detail and specific regional or cultural
traditions.
• For example,
• Douglas Fraser studied village planning.
• Rene Gardi has studied indigenous architecture
• Labelle Prussin has done extensive research on Islamic
architecture in West Africa
•

Studies in the meaning of African art have also emerged as a
result of interdisciplinary views.

The Church of St. George,
Lalibala, Ethiopia, 13th century,
stone

is one of the remarkable piece
of architecture and technology in
Africa, which has been studied.

Contributions from 1970s – 1980s
Examples of scholars who have used other methodologies for detailed
appreciation of African aesthetics and from the African point of view
are
• Dennis Warren & J. Kweku Andrews – Akan
• Harry Silver – Asante
• Susan Vogel, Philip Ravenhill on the Baule

• Roland Abiodun on the Yoruba
• Ekpo Eyoon, the Owo Yoruba

Biographies of individual artists
• William Bascom - Duga of Meko (Yoruba)
• Roslyn Adele Walker - Olowe of Ise (Yoruba)
• Doran H. Ross - Osei Bonsu (Asante)
• Robert Farris Thompson - Abatan (Yoruba)

Art workshops and Promoters
During the colonial and post-colonial period
•

•
•
•
•
•

•

•

Whereas all these scholarly research and publications were going on as
discussed above, there was direct European intervention in governance in
several African countries.
They needed to control activities, customs, traditions, and practices that
were in contravention of British laws and policies.
This led to the introduction of Western education and craft, and eventually
art education in schools and colleges.
There were different approaches to teaching art on the continent.
There were also some Europeans who set up training workshops to train
Africans to produce “primitive” art.
Frank McEwen founded a workshop in the Museum of Harare, Zimbabwe, in
the 1960s based on the educational principles of a refusal to ‘corrupt’ the
African artists by exposing them to the influences of Western Art schools.
The products of these art schools have been active in producing a wide
range of contemporary art representing the dynamic and contemporary
nature of the cultures.
Some have participated in international exhibitions, workshops, residencies,
and painted commissioned works.

Art workshops and Promoters
•

Ruth Schaffner, the owner of the prominent Gallery Watatu in Nairobi,
which opened in 1968, encouraged artists, including some from Angola,
South Africa, Uganda, and Tanzania, to patronize her gallery to produce
what may be described as primitive art because it represents the
“primitivism” that fitted into the intellectual assumptions, which guided
European clients as the preferred choice.

•

She is a good example of an art promoter whose criteria for selection were
to avoid pictorial styles, which reflected academic training or Europeanderived preoccupation with abstractions.

Art workshops and Promoters
•

•

Schaffner believed that academic
instruction spoiled the innate
creativity of the African artist and that
Africans have a different way of
seeing, which should never be altered.
She encouraged the production of
rural and urban everyday life such as
a crowd listening to an evangelist in a
Nairobi park or someone riding a
bicycle.
This philosophy and taste dominated
the contemporary art market in
Nairobi in the 1980s. In this gallery, a
large number of artists who
patronized it were self-taught, and
Schaffner’s relation with them was to
support them by advancing these
artists with money for their family
expenditures and committing them to
unfettered loyalty to produce works of
a specific genre.

Untitled, Anabelle Wanjiku, Kenya

Art workshops and Promoters
•
•
•
•

•

Schaffner’s selective nurturing of “primitive” art was a great commercial
success to the detriment of intellectual or academically trained artists.
They tried not to affect the way the Africans worked.
What has been promoted to a very great extent is the romanticized works
of primitive art and some self-taught artists.
The romantic teaching and funding of organizations that seek to promote
non-trained artists has been extensive with such organizations receiving
external funding from international organizations.
Several other such workshops were set up in some other countries such
as in Nigeria, namely the Oshogbo experiments and the Mbari Club,

Art Schools & Colleges
•

•

•

•
•

•

•

Colonial governments set up educational institutions, some of which
taught art as a formal subject. There were different methods of teaching art
in the schools founded in different areas.
In the Democratic Republic of Congo, DRC, the former Belgian Congo,
three important schools were established there. The most interesting and
perhaps the most influential was the one founded by Pierre RomainDefossés in Lubumbashi in 1944.
After his death it was integrated into Lubumbashi’s Académie des BeauxArts et des Métiers, a school established by Laurent Moonens in 1951.
Defossés School was pioneering in East Africa not because it was the first,
but because it influenced and pioneered the attitude towards the study of
African art in schools.
Frére Marc established another similar school in Kinshasa in 1943.
Many major art schools were established in the former French colonies.
One of the most important was the Poto-Poto School founded in 1951 in
Congo Brazzaville by Pierre Lods, a French mathematics teacher.
Another school was established in 1957 in Dakar, the École des Arts du
Senegal, and in 1966, the Institut Nationale des Arts was started in Abidjan
in La Côte d’Ivoire.
All these schools focused on drawing, painting, sculpture and tapestry.

• In Eastern and Central Africa, four art schools rose to prominence.
• Two of them were the School of Fine Arts at Makerere University
College in Uganda, established in 1930, and later on in the 1940s
the School of Fine and Applied Art in Khartoum, Sudan, was
established.
• These were later followed by the School of Fine Art in Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.

• Later on, in the 1950s the department of art at the Ahmadu Bello
University in Zaria, Nigeria. Many other institutions of higher
learning have since been established and have advanced the
teaching of art. Hitherto these art schools taught mainly studio art
and sculpture.
• In the English-speaking West African countries, the art schools
were concentrated in Ghana and Nigeria. The oldest of these art
schools is the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology established in 1952,

•

Since these early art schools some institutions of higher learning in
Africa have been making strides in incorporating and teaching African art
history. The University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Institute of African Studies,
and University of Ibadan, Nigeria, are some of the few universities in subSaharan Africa that teach and specialise in art history up to Ph.D.

•

Recently the Institute of African Studies, University of Ghana has started
training PhD candidates in African art.

•

Regrettably, African art studies in Ghana has remained largely as part of
the studio courses, but with a wider range of art history topics taught at
the undergraduate level and the establishment of a graduate program in
African art taught in the Department of Design and General Art Studies,
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), Kumasi.

•

These art schools and colleges have produced several African art
scholars both in practice and in the academy.

•

These college-trained artists have participated in both local and
international exhibitions, biennials and triennials.

Contemporary Art & Artists
•

In Africa today there exist different categories of artists practicing art in the
contemporary environment.

•

Traditional art exhibits continue with the traditional pre-colonial past while changing
and adapting new tools and materials, techniques, etc., and incorporating new ideas to
accommodate the myriad of socio-economic and religious influences that have
affected Africa in the colonial and post-colonial periods.

•

Urban art includes painting, and photography dealing with the realities of everyday life
in the urban milieu. This developed in association with African urban cities. Urban
artists are usually self-taught artists.

•

International artists belong to the third current group of artists who are academically
trained from Western-styled institutions. These contemporary artists target their works
to the larger international art market thus contributing to the late twentieth-century
multicultural post-modern art discourse.

•

According to Vogel, international artists are commonly concerned with issues of
traditional culture in an effort “to relocate contemporary Africa between ancestral past
and modern present.”

•

But the contemporary engages with current socio-political issues and concerns such
as waste, environment, and corruption and experiment with new media and materials
while taking advantage of technology, the Internet, and globalization.

Contributions from 1970s – 1980s
Since African art emerged as an academic discipline, many scholars
have continued to research African art. Other themes that have been
explored have been African Art as a Process as opposed to a
Product.
For example,
• Herbert M. Cole, 1970, African Arts of Transformation
• Robert Farris Thompson, 1974, African Art in Motion

Some scholars are breaking new boundaries of time and space
questioning what is “traditional,” “contemporary,” “popular,” and
“elite” with publications such as,
• Bennetta Jules-Rosette, Paula Ben-Amos, on tourist art

• Marilyn Houlberg, on collecting
• Ilona Fabian and Johannes Fabian, on popular painting

Contemporary works and Exhibitions from the 1990s
The study of Africa’s contemporary art is gaining ascendancy with some
notable exhibitions and publications

• Susan Vogel, 1991, Africa Explores: 20th Century African Art,
• Sidney Littlefield Kasfir, 2000, Contemporary African Art,
• Jean Loup Amselle and Jean-Hubert Martin, 2005, Africa Remix:
Contemporary Art of a Continent,
• Okwui Enwezor, 2009, Contemporary African Art Since 1980.
• Art biennials have become important platforms for the increasing
internationalization of contemporary African artists, and as places for
staging and introducing new African contemporary genres.
• Several biennales and triennials continue to be held on the continent.
Though some have been irregular, however, tell us of the trends in the art
landscape to promote local artists. E.g. La Biennale Di Venezia (2019)

• Several Ghanaian artists have participated in some of these biennales,
exhibitions, and art fairs.

• Egypt was the first country on the continent to use the art biennial
format as a political tool for national promotion of art, long before
art biennials became a trend in the 1990s.
• The Alexandria Biennale for Mediterranean countries was founded
in 1955 and celebrated its 26th edition in 2016.
• The Dakar Biennale was conceived in 1989 alternating between
literature and art. The first edition in 1990 was focused on
literature, and in 1992 on visual art. In 1993 the structure of the
biennale was transformed and Dak’Art, 1996, became an exhibition
specifically devoted to contemporary African art. The last was held
in 2022.

• The Biennale de Bamako, also known as the Bamako Encounters,
is one of the oldest art biennials on the continent (founded in 1993).
• The Johannesburg Biennale had a rather short existence (1995 and
1997).

Contemporary Works and Exhibitions from the 1990s
Several of the twenty-first-century biennales taking place on the continent
have been largely led by private independent initiatives and non-profit
organizations.
Some of these are
• The Biennale de Bamako, which gained its international repute
because it boosted the creation of photography-based festivals such
as the Lagos Photo Festival (2010)
• Photo Festa Maputo (2002) and the Gwanza Month of Photography
(2009)
• Others include the East African Biennale,
• The Doula triennial called Biennale de Douala, DUTA, Salon Urban de
Douala (2010, 2013, 2017)
• AFiRIperFOMA (2013)

• Biennial Kampala (2014, 2016, 2018) and Art Biennale or Rencontres
Picha/Biennale de Lubumbashi (2008, 2017)

African art history scholars
Since the introduction of African art as an academic discipline,
several African scholars are beginning to participate in the
knowledge production enterprise. For example,
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Enwezor, Okwui.
Okeke-Agulu, Chika.
Kwami, Atta.
Labi, Kwame Amoah
Nkiru, N.
Ogbechie, Sylvester O.
Seid’ou, K.
Fosu, Kojo
Olu, Oguibe
Mudimbe, V. Y.
Hassan, Sallah

Challenges and Successes in the Discipline
Challenges
•

Fewer higher institutions training art historians

•

Perishable documents

•

Elusive oral sources

•

Biased accounts

•

Lack of written documentation

•

Archaeology (good/bad)

•

No critical public discourses

Successes
•

Several local and international exhibitions/ biennials/triennials

•

African scholars have started participating in global discourses

•

Several critical journal articles, books, exhibition catalogues, etc., etc. being
published by including African scholars.

•

Some have founded art journals such as NKA Journal of Contemporary Art,
Critical Interventions, Journal of African Art History and Visual Culture

•

The hosting of the 17th Arts Council of the African Studies Association
(ACASA) Triennial at the University of Ghana in 2018.

Lecture Summary
•

We have discussed a brief history of the development of African art
history as an academic discipline.

•

Examined some of the sources for this including

– Early European sources
– Mid-nineteenth-century European interests in the content and
value of African art
– African art as an academic discipline
• Some scholars and areas of interest
– Art workshops in Africa
– Art Schools and Colleges

– Local and International Exhibitions
– African scholars’ publications and contributions to the discipline

UGRC 221
AFRICAN ART, ITS
PHILOSOPHY AND
CRITICISM

WEEK FOUR

Selected Survey of African Art Traditions
Kemet / Egypt

East Africa

Lecture Objectives
• To introduce you to the varied traditional art form
within northern Africa, Egypt, Kemet and East
Africa.
• Conduct a survey of selected earliest studied and
documented art works, tomb markers, rock
paintings, churches and mosques.
• To evaluate the content of the pyramids and
churches and the style of the early mosques and
domestic dwellings in East Africa
• A broad overview of selected iconic works of East
Africa.

Northern Africa

Rock Art
Tassili Region in North Africa
▪

The Sahara has not always been arid and hash. During the geological phase
around 11,000 BC which lasted for eight thousand years, the region was a wellwatered savana, a fertile land where diverse people invented new technologies
and created new art forms.
o By about 11,000 BC the desert had emerged. This area spans between
Morroco, Algeria and Tunisia. This region is known by its Arabic name, the

Magreb.
o It is the mountainous region of the Sahara which contain rock paintings and
engravings.

o This region has a long history of attracting foreign settlers beginning with
colonies founded by the Phoenicians and ancient Greeks during the first
millennium BC and through subsequent conquest and ruled by the Romans,

Vandals, Byzantines and the Arabs.
o The art discovered in this area include shells from Paleolithic sites in central
Tunisia and intriguing semi-abstract stone sculptures from the central Sahara

which may date to the first millennium.

Rock Art
Tassili Region in North Africa
•
•
•
•

•

•

Superimposed Elephant and two giraffes, Large
Wild Fauna Style, Fezzan Region, Libya, After
8000 BC.

A superimposed elephant and
two giraffes.
The giraffes are almost life size
They are portrayed in
naturalistic style.
Images of giraffes and elephant
incised by Paleolithic artists into
the rock walls of a streambed.
This shows a time when the
region was filled with wild
animals now extinct and found
only south of the Sahara.
The outlines are deep and
smooth and the continuous
outlines of the three animals are
so fluid, that it is difficult to
remember that they were
labouriously cut into the rock
with stone tools and abrasives.

Rock Art
Tassili Region in North Africa
o The outlines are deep smooth and continuous that makes the the beasts so fluid. The

portrayal is largely naturalistic and certainly observed from life.
o Symbols and images cut into rocks have been found in the Canary islands in the west
of the Red Sea and in south of the Sahara.
o This type of rock art is generally known as Large Wild Fauna style, after the impressive
scale of animals depicted.

o Also known as the Bubalous articus, an extinct species of wild cattle sometimes
portrayed. The giraffes are sometimes life size.
o Rock art are the oldest and most widespread Stone Age art form of the Sahara.
o Hundreds of images have been found in the Central Sahara.

Rock Art
Tassili Region in North Africa
•

Scholars have often assumed that these were somehow involved in “hunting
magic.”

•

This was an attempt by the Paleolithic people to control the animals they wished
to kill.

•

Some images are clearly of supernatural style. A rhinoceros lying on its back with
its broad feet waving in the air is a good example.

•

Another are two human-like creatures with heads resembling jackals in running
position appear on the right.

•

The integration of animal heads and human bodies seems remarkably similar to
the ways in which ancient Egyptians depicted their deities.

•

In the rock paintings the people seem to be telling stories of their people in
ancient times.

•

Over thirty thousand rock paintings have been found in northern African with
about half in the Tassili region.

Rock Art
Tassili Region in North Africa

Jackal (?) headed figures with rhinoceros, Fezzan Region, Libya, Large Wild
Fauna style about 8000 (?) BC.

Rock Art
Tassili Region in North Africa
•

•

•

Most pastoralist art of Tassili N’Ajjer
and the surrounding highlands was
produced during the middle of the
fourth millennium. By the second
millennium, the pastoralists seem to
have left the Sahara.
The painted rock face shows a
woman striding forward with
determination, and pulling along a
child whose whining protests are
almost audible.
Such pastoralist’s art works were
created by herders and
agriculturalists and clearly depicts
everyday life in a clearly large scene.

Rock Art
Tassili Region in North Africa

•

•

•
•

•

Figure with camel, Berber, Tassili n’Ajjer
region. Algeria, After 700 BC. Pigment on
Stone.

After the Sahara became dry, rock art
continued. Horses and chariots were
later common subjects.
Images mark locations along transSaharan trade routes used by seminomadic Berber peoples.
The painting is a delightful arrangement
of geometric shapes.
The camel itself has been constructed of
triangles and parabolas. The solid
rectangular rider, probably male, is
contrasted with the triangular forms of
the figure in the enclosure, probably
female.
The figures both raise their hands in
identical gestures giving us the
impression that they have been seized
by some strong emotion.

Rock Art
Tassili Region in North Africa
•
•

•

•

•

A typically complex scene of cattle.
A man seems to tend his herd, while
women and children carry on a
conversation.
The subtle reds, yellows, and browns
in this painting show the wide range
of ochers, or coloured clays, used by
the artist.
White chalk and black charcoal may
also have been used. Chemical
analysis has revealed that the
pigments were bound with milk.
Thus the medium as well as the
subject matter underscores the
importance of cattle in the life of the
pastoralist people.

Scene with cattle and figures, Pastoralist style,
Tassili n’Ajjer Region, Algeria, 5000-2000 BC.
Pigment on stone.

Rock Art
Tassili Region in North Africa
▪

There have been a number of dates given to the sites in the Tassili from the mid

fourth to the early millennium BC.
▪

The styles change over time, and sometimes paintings overlap the other.
Subject matter reflects this change too.

▪

Some rock paintings represent animals now extinct in the area such as elephants,
rhinoceros, hippopotamus and buffalo.

▪

The weapons, carried by human beings also represent change: from axes,
throwing sticks, bows, javelins swords and finally firearms.

▪

The animals drawn are in naturalistic manner often with great attention to

details.
▪

The human beings are frequent in the paintings and show the relationship with
animals while the engravings almost represent isolated subjects.

North African Rock Art in the Tassili Region
Summary
• Rock arts from the Tassili region are one of the oldest known
art works in Africa.
• They include engravings cut into rock surfaces as well as later
painted surfaces.
• The themes reflect the animals they encountered at the time.
• These animals are now extinct in the region.
• Other themes are also depicted.
• The subjects change over time reflecting contact with new
materials.

Kemet / Egypt

Human development took place along the
Nile River, which flooded the low lands
surrounding it, leaving a fertile planting
grounds for crops. The people called their
black fertile land Kemet, or the black land.

Early Egyptian Art
o We will discuss three art works - pottery, clay figure and a palette, which
will serve as introduction to subsequent construction of burial markers
and their content.
o Between the eighth and fifth millennia BC, before the Savannah’s became
the deserts of the Sahara, important cultural innovations were taking place

and spreading from Nubia westward to the Atlantic Ocean.
o Populations begun to domesticate cattle, cultivate grains, and fire ceramic
vessels.

o Pottery dated to the eighth millennium testifies to these changes. A
female image in fired clay from the fourth millennium Egyptian culture
named after the site of Naqada displays full curves and simplified features

typical of objects from this period.

Early Egyptian Art
• A number of terracotta vessels created
during this period have survived.
• Some of the pots utilize dark brown
pigments to depict animal forms and daily
life on the Nile.

• Notice the boat in the center of this pot.
Humans and other forms, which are humanlike but not quite human in appearance ride
inside.
• Perhaps this is an allusion to the journey
one takes in death.
•The finely crafted pots and cups
demonstrate the mastery that developed
from regional pottery traditions that were
already over two thousand years old.

Early Egyptian Art
What do you think this gesture in this
image mean?

•
•
•
•

Imitation of cow horns?
gesture of prayer?
Mourning, or
Dancing?

• Perhaps she was meant to be held around
the lower portion, or maybe the figure would
have been partially dressed.

Female figure with raised arms, Pre-dynastic
Period, Egypt, terracotta

Early Egyptian Art
•
•
•
•

From Egypt, pre-dynastic period
A female figure
Has raised arms
This is a figure from the early
Egyptian culture known as Naqada. It
displays the full curves and simplified
features of female forms.
• Fired works in clay were some of the
most striking objects made in Nubia
and Kemet (Egypt) during the fourth
and third millennia.
• Breasts are indicated by simple
protrusion, as is the bird-like head.
The arms curve upward as if in
imitation of horns, recalling the
gestures of horned female images
from the Central Sahara.

Early Egyptian Art
o Towards the end of the fourth millennium, around 3100 BC, a series
of kings attempted to unify the various districts of Egypt into a single
realm. A stone object known as Palette of Narmer refers to those
political developments.

o This is the most important work known unearthed from a deposit
near a temple at Nekhen, the Upper Egyptian capital of the First
Dynasty to have come to us from the years prior to the Early Dynastic
period of Kemet (2920-2649 BC).
o It is the most important work to come down to us prior to the Early
Dynastic period of Kemet.

Early Egyptian Art
•

•

Palette of Narmer, Egypt, Archaic, Dynasty
1, C. 3000 BC. Height. 63.5cm

This object is called a Palette
because the indentation on one
side may have held a pigment.
At the top of each side are early
versions of a form of writing the
people of Kemet called medu
netcher, “the words of the
gods.”
The symbols have become
known in English as
“hieroglyphs,” from the Greek
word for “holy carryings.” Here
the catfish, nar, and broad
chisel, mer, combine to spell
one of the first recorded names
in human history, Narmer.

Early Egyptian Art

The relief works on the slate
show the king in a smiting pose.
The work is in a hierarchical
scale.
It is in the form of a composite
perspective.
The pictographs are translated as
“nar” and “mer”.
Palette of Narmer, Archaic Period, Egypt, slate

Early Egyptian Art

Archaic Period c. 3150-2700 BC

Palette of Narmer, Archaic Period, Egypt, slate
The king who may have unified Upper and Lower Egypt is known as King Narmer. He is
credited with this achievement because of the subject matter depicted on this large
ceremonial palette.

Early Egyptian Art

The images on the other side of
the palette are depicted in
hierarchical scale.
The governors carry some staffs.
The work is in composite
perspective.
Some of the works appear to be
near Eastern animal motif.
Could this have been used as a
ceremonial palette?
Palette of Narmer, Archaic Period, Egypt, slate

Early Egyptian Art

•
•

•

•

Narmer is the largest figure depicted on the palette and he towers over the less
important figures that surround him.
This use of size refers to relative status known as hierarchical scale, or a social
proportion. On the side of the pallet Narmer is depicted wearing a white crown of
Upper Egypt and on the other side depicted wearing the red crown of Lower Egypt.
Both sides portray him victorious over his enemies as he raises a mace to smite a
prisoner he grasps by the hair. By smiting his enemies and bringing order to chaos,
Narmar upholds divine justice.
The kings’ story is supported by divine beings who will reappear in the art of Kemet
for the next three thousand years. His aggressive stance is mirrored by the actions of
the bull, an emblem of virility and power later linked to the god Ptah.

Early Egyptian Art

This is another example of a palette.
Palettes were also used to mark important
events. This Battlefield Palette is covered in
low relief sculpture. It shows that groups
were battling for control near the end of
the Pre-dynastic Period.

Egyptian Pyramids
•

The history of the Kemet after the Early Dynastic period is marked by three broad
periods of unity and stability known to historians as Old Kingdom (c2649 BC),
Middle Kingdom (c.2040 BC), and the New Kingdom (c. 1550-1070).
o Perhaps the most influential monument of the Old Kingdom was the
funerary complex constructed for the Dynasty 3rd King Netjerikhet Djoser at
Saqqara around 2620 BC.
o The funerary complex of Djoser had a significant impact upon later
architecture.

Other influential features were roof supports and wall

ornaments modeled after bundles of reeds or an aquatic plant such as
papyrus and lotus.
o Freestanding columns in the later temples of Kemet continued to attract
these motifs.
o They believed that the west bank of the Nile River, where the sun sets into
the horizon is where the dead enter the afterlife, was considered to be an
especially suitable site for tombs.

Location of Egyptian Pyramids
The conception of spatial relationships as
divisions between east (the place of birth)
and west (the place of rebirth) and
between north (Lower Egypt) and south
(Upper Egypt) was clearly based upon the
geography of the Nile Valley.
Tombs in Egypt were built on the west side
of the Nile, while palaces and cities are
generally constructed on the east side of
the Nile.
The West side is associated with the land
of the dead. This makes sense when you
consider that the desert is located in this
area.
Also the sun sets in the West. So, just
beyond the fertile plains near the western
Nile, people bury their dead.

Egyptian Pyramids

Those with enough money during this period build a mastaba, or bench, over the tomb.
While initially people buried a body with objects in a pit leaving a mound over the top,
they began to elaborate these mounds.
The word mastaba means bench. Most mastabas are plain, rectangular markers.

Egyptian Pyramids

Life was lived modestly but tombs became important. After all, it was believed that this
time on earth was very short in comparison to the time spent hereafter. Thus, we have little
evidence of early Egyptian housing, but we do have tombs. Houses would have been
constructed in wood, whereas tombs were constructed in stone. Wood does not preserve
well.

Egyptian Pyramids

Djoser’s Funerary Complex, Saqqara, Lower
Egypt, Imhotep Dynasty 3, C.2620 BC. Stone

•

Perhaps the most influential
monument of the Old
Kingdom (around 2620 BC)
was the funerary complex
constructed for the Dynasty
of king Netjerikhet, or Djoser,
at Saqqara around 2620 BC.

•

An inscription in the tomb
complex itself suggests that
Djoser entrusted the
architectural work to his
advisor Imhotep.

•

If so, then Imhotep is the first
artist in history whose name
is known to us.

Imhotep – Architect of the Funerary Complex of Djoser
Priest of sun god Re (Ra)

Egyptian Pyramids

Old Kingdom

c. 2700-2250 BC

Plan of the Funerary Complex of Djoser
• This is the complex necropolis within the necropolis of Saqqara
• It has various components.
•The entrance is situated at the SE corner.
• The walled complex resemble the earlier tomb we looked at with receding walls

Egyptian Pyramids

Jubilee Court, Funerary Complex of King Djoser, Saqqara, Egypt, stone
Beyond the courtyard are the North and South palaces. Each structure utilizes engaged
columns with differing capitals at the top of the column. For the North palace, a
representation of the papyrus was used. For the South palace, a different plant, one
common to this area, was used – the lily. The columns may represent wooden versions or
bundled reeds. Other buildings are used for storage. Some are false fronts with niches
instead of real doors.

Egyptian Pyramids
• The pyramids are stepped, like stacked
mastaba
• They cover the burial pit.

Funerary Complex
of Djoser, Saqqara,
Egypt, stone.

Egyptian Pyramids
Even during Imhotep's lifetime, he was worshipped as the sungod incarnate. Imhotep was also a medical doctor. He had many
skills. He was certainly an architectural genius and possibly the
earliest genius known to man by name.
The complex served as an inspiration for architects who
followed. It was the first to use stone. Quarrying stone on such a
scale required the organized mobilization of a large work force.
The effort and expense to build this monumental project
signifies the centralized society of Old Kingdom Egypt. Small
blocks of limestone are utilized in this complex, but increasingly
larger stones are used in later tombs. The smaller stones refer to
the mud blocks previously used for mastaba.
The complex marks the first Egyptian use of a pyramidal shape
for a tomb marker. It stands nearly 200 feet in height, measuring
approx. 413 feet by 345 feet. The pyramid was originally smaller,
and later enlarged. Perhaps Imhotep was working out the
engineering aspect as he went along. The temples were built
last.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Djoser, Funerary Complex of King
Djoser, Saqqara, Egypt, stone.
Since all of the major Egyptian tombs have been looted, little is left to us of the sculpture
and other art forms that once filled these tombs. From Djoser's complex, we have this lifesized seated statue found in the serdab. The serdab is a small stone chamber adjacent to
the mortuary temple with two holes cut in its front wall. These holes allowed the ka, a
human soul with wings, when inhabiting the statue, to look out onto his offerings left in
front of the wall or smell the incense burning before it.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids
Djoser, Funerary Complex
of King Djoser, Saqqara,
Egypt, stone

Khafre, Giza, Egypt,
diorite

Egyptian Pyramids
▪ Similar emphases upon the cardinal directions appear in art and

architecture elsewhere on the African continent, and may be based upon
ways of ordering the cosmos
▪ The most famous Old Kingdom pyramids are three enormous tombs
constructed a dozen miles down stream from Saqqara at the west bank side
of Giza.
▪ The oldest and largest of the three pyramids was built for Khufu (ruled
c.2551-2528 BC).
o It rises to a height of 481 feet from a perfectly square base oriented to the

points of the compass. The smooth shinning surfaces of all three pyramids
once reflected the bright sunlight, and the people of Kemet seem to have
seen these monuments as channeling or celebrating the sun’s life giving
rays.

Egyptian Pyramids

The pyramid of Khufu
480’ high
First and largest

Egyptian Pyramids

Pyramid of Khufu
3 smaller pyramids, marking the tombs of queens / women of the family
Mastabas were built nearby; nobles wanted to be near Khufu in the afterlife

Art works from Egyptian
Pyramids

Boat, from the Pyramid
complex of Khufu, wood

Egyptian Pyramids

• Sphinx and pyramid of
Khafre, Giza. Lower
Egypt,

dynasty

4,

2520-2494 bc. Stone
height
137m

(pyramid)

Great Sphinx, Giza, Egypt, limestone
The Sphinx was built around the same time as the Pyramid of Khafre. The work is about
240 feet long and 65 feet in height. The outcrop of natural limestone, with some added
blocks, has been carved to resemble a lion with a human head wearing a royal headdress
(portrait of Khafre?). This motif was commonly associated with Ra, the sun god. Its
presence denotes the growing importance of the sun god.

Sphinx and Pyramid of Khafre, Giza, Egypt, stone
Some of the wealthier kings after Djoser copied the pyramidal tomb form for their tombs,
including Huni and Snefru. But the three pyramids in Giza that came after are perhaps the
best known.

Egyptian Pyramids

• This is the tomb of an early Queen. Nobility were buried in Saqqara, a necropolis, or
city of the dead.
• Chambers in the ground lead to the body and to goods. It was covered with a floor
and additional chambers containing goods the ka needed in the afterlife. This was
covered with timber roofing, then mud-brick.
• The entire structure reached 20 feet in height. The mud-brick facade resembles a
palace and may give us some idea of what the royal palace in Memphis may have
originally looked like.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids
•

Each pyramid has a temple at its base, connected by long causeway to a second
temple on the Nile bank.

•

Near the causeway joining the pyramid of Khafre to the Nile, an outcrop of stone
was carved to form an enormous lion with a human head. This form was
extended with stone blocks.

•

The composite beast became known as a sphinx, a word in Greek meaning “living
image.” Lions roaming the edges of the desert wilderness were also viewed as
guardians of the rising and setting sun, and thus the creature seems to have been
associated with the horizons, who were themselves viewed as entrances to the
underworld and afterlife.

•

An image of a human figure or a solar disk between recumbent lions was one of
the ways to indicate” the horizon.” As a result of these complex relationships, by
the New Kingdom times the great Sphinx was known as Horemakhet, meaning
“Horus in the horizon,” and was honoured as a protective, divine image.

Geographic location of three Egyptian Pyramids
The third pyramid is the smallest and was built by the grandson of Khufu, son of Khafre. The
pyramid measures only 150 feet in height. The burial chamber is located below ground
underneath the pyramid.

Menkaure

Khafre

Khufu

Early Egyptian Art, and North African Rock Paintings

o The third and smallest pyramid was constructed for
the King Menkaure (ruled c. 2490-2472 BC). The

walls of this pyramid’s two funerary temples and
the causeway that linked them were lined with
fine-grained stone statues, among them an

idealized

image

of

Menkaure

himself

and

Khamerernebty II his great Royal Wife, or principal
consort.

•

Menkaure and Khamerernebty from the
funerary complex of Menkaure, Giza, Lower
Egypt.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids
o Khamerernebty shares the heavy wig and facial features of nearby sculpture
depicting bovine goddess Hathor.

o Their slim waists and thick legs King Menkaure provide both solidity and grace, and
their joined pose communicates strength and dignity.
o The erect posture of the stances (arms at the side, fists clenched, one foot forward)

are painted with geometric patterns.
o The head and arms are very tiny, while the mass of hair, the pubic triangle and the
contours of the hip region are greatly enlarged. The people of Kemet considered

abundant well-groomed hair to be erotic, and the emphasis on genitalia suggests
that the figure is concerned with sexuality.
o The hair is made of tiny beads formed from the black mud of the Nile floods and
was considered imbued with the mud’s life giving fertility.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

•

Female figures in many different forms have been found in tombs in both Kemet
and Nubia through the first millennium BC.

•

Although there is no clear link between the Egyptian and Nubian female figures
and other African works, it seems safe to generalize that all these images may
have had a role in protecting the sexual and reproductive health of their owners.

•

In Kemet, this protective role would have made them quite suitable as grave
objects, for by the time of the Middle Kingdom the souls of the dead seem to
have been expected to draw upon the sexual energy in order to be born again in
the afterlife. Just as sexual union is necessary for birth into the world of the
living.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids
Rock-cut Tomb of Amenemhet, Beni Hasan,
Middle Kingdom

on-axis approach

hypostyle hall

fresco secco

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Offering Bearers, Tomb of Meket-re, Deir el-Bahri, Egypt, wood

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Cattle Count, Tomb of Meket-re, Deir el-Bahri, Egypt, wood

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Funeral Boat, Tomb of Meket-re, Deir el-Bahri, Egypt, wood

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Tomb of Khnum-hotep, Beni Hasan, Egypt

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Men Feeding Oryxes, Tomb of Khnum-hotep, Beni Hasan, Egypt, fresco secco

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

During the New Kingdom, priests were gaining increasing
power, as all the temple building illustrates.
Amenophis IV didn’t like this and chose a radical approach to
change the status quo.
First, he changed his name to Akhenaten to reflect his new
religious belief in a singular god named Aton.
Second, he appointed himself as the prophet to this
monotheistic religion, thereby collecting all the money from
nobles and wealthy merchants for temples. Thus, he upset the
status quo by re-instating power upon the pharaoh rather than
the priests.
Akhenaten, Karnak, Egypt, sandstone

Content of Egyptian Pyramids
Then, Akhenaten moved the capital from Thebes, where
priests held the power, to a stone city he had built called Tell
el-Amarna.
The art also seems to reflect a dramatic change in taste. Here
we see his colossal statue from a Temple for Aton in Karnak.
Akhenaten made a great number of changes during his 18-year
reign.
He upset a lot of people. There was a struggle for power and a
vizier eventually succeeds and makes himself pharaoh.

Akhenaten, Karnak, Egypt, sandstone

Content of
Egyptian Pyramids

Vizier Haremhab began as the regent for Akenaton’s
successor, Tutankhaten. The crafty vizier immediately changed
the religion back to polytheism. By doing so, he gained the
support of the priests whom he later needed in order to gain
control.

Tutankhaten came to the throne at the age of 9. He was the
husband of the third daughter of Akhenaten. His name was
originally Tutankhaten, but Haremhab most likely convinced
him to change the name to Tutankamun, reflecting the
worship of Amun or Re.
We know so much about Akhenaten's reign because of the
discovery of Tutankhamun's tomb by English archaeologist
Howard Carter in 1922.
After all the looting of the pyramids and temple tombs, kings
now were buried in secret without markers. These tombs
were hidden. However, tomb robbers found every one, but
this one.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Akhenaten, Nefertiti and Three Daughters, Amarna, Egypt, limestone.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Thutmose, Nefertiti, Amarna, painted limestone

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Nebamun Hunting, Nebamun's Tomb, Thebes, Egypt, fresco secco.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids
This is a fragment of a Hunting Scene from
Nebamun's Tomb in Thebes. Originally on his
chapel wall, the scene depicts Nebamun in
hierarchical scale on a boat on the Nile. His
wife stands behind him and his daughter
between his legs.
Nebamun's hunting stance evokes the smiting
pose. This was intentionally done to convey his
ability to emerge victorious from the dangers
of the transition between life and death.
Nebamun Hunting, Nebamun's Tomb,
Thebes, Egypt, fresco secco

The action of throwing the stick is a visual pun
for creation. The daughter is placed
underneath him to indicate that she is the fruit
of his loins. Thus, interlocking references are
made to sexuality and rebirth.

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

The fowl, the cat and plant life are painstaking
detailed and stylized. The profusion of winged
birds in flight may be an additional reference
to the ka, a human soul with wings.

The cone on the wife's head was a perfumed
wax. The heat caused it to melt a bit and kept
the woman smelling nicely.

Details, Nebamun Hunting, Nebamun's
Tomb, Thebes, Egypt, fresco secco

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Musicians and Dancers (Banquet Scene), Nebamun's Tomb,
Thebes, Egypt, fresco secco

Content of Egyptian Pyramids

Funerary Mask, from Tutankhamun's tomb, Valley of the Kings, Egypt, gold
with inlay of glass and semiprecious stones, 1323 BC

Egyptian Pyramids
Summary
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

The New Kingdom was the period of Kemet’s greatest military and political
expansion.
As in the past, tombs were full of artistic treasures, but are now grave goods.
Allusions to sexuality and rebirth were still important in the New Kingdom
tombs, but there was a new emphasis upon the god of death and rebirth.
Funerary chapels adjacent to the sealed burial chamber served as settings for
annual memorial ceremonies.
The walls were adorned with paintings, or with painted images carved in low
relief, which often portrayed the feasting, music, dancing and drinking desirable
at a memorial festival.
On one level the dead man is depicted young and alive, enjoying a pleasant
family outing on the river. Yet the man’s aggressive gesture recalls that of
Narmer, and it proclaims the ability of the deceased, aided by the feral cat, to
emerge victorious from the dangers of transition from death to life.
This fragment also contains references to creative power of human sexuality.

East Africa
Swahili
Coast
Swahili is Arabic for
“shore”

Indian
Ocean
Swahili
Coast

Trade Routes

EAST AFRICA
• The East Africa region can variously be described.
• Histories of the constituting countries are as varied as the region.
• The European colonizing powers here were the British, Italians,
Belgians and the French.
• The major countries are Ethiopia, Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya, which
between them have 80 percent of the total population.
• The population of over 200 million.
• These countries are also close to what is described as the Great Lakes
region which includes Rwanda, Burundi, Congo and others. Again they
are sometimes seen as the horn of Africa in which sense you can also
include Somalia, Eritrea.
• In terms of regional grouping or economic unions, some of the Indian
Ocean Islands such as Seychelles, Comoros, and Mauritius also see
themselves as belonging to the East Africa Union or Common Market.

Aksum
•

•

•

•

•

Aksumite merchants, traders, diplomats and warriors travelled
between the capital of Aksum (now in Ethiopia), and the port of
Adulis (now in Eritrea).
During the first two to three centuries the kings of Aksum
constructed a number of spectacular palaces made out of wood
and stones. These buildings have fallen into ruins.
Other important information about these palaces are deduced from
the enormous granite monoliths, which marked the burial sites of
Aksumite royals.
Some of the monoliths were constructed between the third and
fifth century AD and measured between ten and ninety-feet tall,
and carved in relief to resemble a skyscraper.
Doors, windows, and protruding beam-ends are all copied in stone.
The dead were buried underground below these towering stone
works.

Aksum
• A flourishing trade linked the various kingdoms in the horn of Africa
(present-day Ethiopia, Djibouti and Somalia) to both Egypt and India.
• This contributed to the development of interrelated cultures on both the
western and eastern sides of the Red Sea.
• In southern Arabia and Eritrea, the Ethio-Sabean kingdoms shared a
similar language and culture.
• Ethiopia’s relationship with the Middle East dates to Judaism.
• Around the 4th century some people in Ethiopia adopted Judaism based on
the Hebrew Scriptures, Ethiopia is mentioned for e.g. “Ethiopia shall
stretch forth her hands unto God”.
• During the fourth century AD, there was a blend of Judaism and
Christianity in the Ethiopian Highlands.
• Exana, the Aksumite king, defeated Meroe, the southern administrative
capital of Cush, and established Christianity as the religion of Aksum just
about the time it became legal throughout the Roman Empire.
• By the beginning of the Christian era, an Ethio-Sabean kingdoms in the
Ethiopian highlands had established the kingdom of Aksum.

Lalibala churches
•

•

•
•

•
•

As was the practise in many Christian places at the time, Nubian and Egyptian
Coptic artists employed Byzantine styles in their works even if the rulers or those
who commissioned them had no political or religious ties to Byzantine. This
Byzantine style had dark outlines of the figures, huge eyes, and the rhythmic
parallel folds of their drapery, and is particularly similar in style to the paintings
produced during the first three to four centuries of Islamic rule in Egypt.
Many of the murals and devotional images produced during the period of Aksum’s
architectural construction did not survive as they were destroyed during the
eleventh century, when rulers of the Zagwe Dynasty overthrew the Aksum and
neighbouring kingdoms
Subsequent monarchs refused to accept the Zagwe emperors as divine people
with divine authority to rule Ethiopia.
However, the thirteenth century Zagwe emperor Lalibala, or Lalibela is still
revered as a saint because of his ambitious desire to create a new Jerusalem on
Ethiopian soil.
The site Lalibala chosen for this was an Ethiopian highland about 850 feet above
sea level, which now bears his name and a place of pilgrimage and retreat.
In this place, stone carvers sculpted eleven churches, with each being a
counterpart of a church in Jerusalem.

Church of St. George,
Lalibala, Ethiopia, 13th
century, stone.

Lalibala churches
•
•

•

•

•
•

•

Unlike the earlier churches in Aksum, these new churches were constructed in stone carved
out of a solid rock and mortar, and reinforced with timber.
The approach was that the carvers started from the ground and chipped away the rock from
the roof down to the foundations, and tunnelled into the mass of stone to hollow out the
interior from the ceiling to the floor. According to legendary accounts, angels took up the
tools of the sleeping workers every night to help them complete the churches in a
miraculously short time. The traditions recount hearing the sound of hammers striking the
stones.
Most of the stone cut churches are rectangular in plan, and have a form of a basilica, but the
Beta Giorghis, meaning “House of (Saint) George” is in the shape of a cross whose arms have
equal length.
The carved lines on the church visible from the top of the pit encircling the church
emphasises the central plan, which is a quite common feature of Byzantine churches. During
their processions they wind their way up and down this narrow passages, tunnels, and
stairways, while some chanted prayers and joined the worshipers above and below.
Some of these Lalibabla churches have windows set in recessed panels like these carved in
the Aksumite monoliths, thus following the architectural style evolved over a thousand years.
The inside ceiling of Beta Giorghis displays a central hemispherical dome similar to those of
the Byzantine churches seen by Ethiopian pilgrims who visited Jerusalem.
Other Lalibela churches constructed replicate the same stone and timber ceilings of early
Aksumite buildings.

Later Christian Arts of Ethiopia
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

Nubia came under the Ottoman Empire around AD 1516.
Thus, Islam ruled for a while until the Solomonic period when Christians regained
freedom from Islam.
The churches they built afterwards and the art work associated with the architecture in
the 17th and 18th centuries depict history and migration such as “Mount of the light of
the Trinity”; the wall paintings, depiction of the Holy of Holies and in the style of what is
called Gondarene, the areas where sacred tablets are kept, the Holy Trinity, depiction
of Christian leaders etc.
Other art forms depict Ethiopia beliefs in dance and singing from the time of King David.
Other art forms prior to the 1970s were in metal forms - Christian crosses made by
Ethiopian Jews known as Falasha also noted for weaving and pottery.
There were also liturgical art by Debtera who produced for individual and churches.
They produced talisman, sacred scrolls and providing mystical protection for people.
They could be long strips of a goatskin sometimes laid over someone lying in bed, or
hung in a bedroom.

•

•
•

•

•

•
•

The churches built in this region by the
Solomonic kings have survived quite
well.
This church was founded by King Iassu
I towards the end of the seventeenth
century.
This is a small rectangular church just
outside Gondar.
The wall paintings of this interior
display the full aesthetic impact of the
style known as Gondarene, originally
developed by artists working for the
court in Gondar during the
seventeenth century.
At the front of the church are the two
arched and veiled entrances to the
sanctuary, or “holy or holies”, the area
where the sacred tablets are kept.
Above and between the arches is
Jesus depicted crucified upon the
cross.
Above the crucifixion is the Trinity
depicted as three identical elders with
a halo of gold and red light.

Later Christian Arts of Ethiopia

Interior of the church of Debre Berhan
Selassie, Gondar, Ethiopia, 17th century.
Pigment and plaster.

Diptych, Fre Siyon,
1445-80. Ethiopia,
Solomonic Period.
Tempera on Gessocovered wood.

The above diptych, is a portable two-paneled image as an example of the work of Fre Siyon’s
work. Painted in tempera on two pieces of wood it can be closed for transportation and
opened like a book and placed upright on a flat surface for the use as a devotional image.
The left image depicts Maryam with the infant Jesus in her left arm. Typical of African
depictions, the face shows little expression but the gestures full of meaning.
Two angels fill the corners of this scene. On the right panel here are three rows of saints turn
to view the mother and child.
CAN YOU DO A VISUAL ANALYSIS OF THE WORK AND ATTEMPT EXPLAINING WHAT THIS PAINTING MEAN.

The Swahili Coast
• The people along the coast of Eastern Africa are Bantu-speaking
and were linked by an ancient maritime trade to Arabia and India.
• Arabs who came to dominate these places called these people and
their language Swahili, Arabic word meaning, “shore.”
• They were early converts to Islam and as a result their art and
architecture has been greatly influenced by the arts of the Islamic
people and culture.
• There have been additional influences absorbed through the
Swahili trade with China, India, Madagascar, Europe and the interior
of East Africa.
• The Swahili culture is a multi-cultural one.
• It runs through Eastern Africa as a result of years of migration when
people in these societies through trade, kinship, agriculture and
particularly pastoral adventures travelled in the region.
• The Swahili language is extensively used and understood in
Tanzania, Kenya, Eritrea, Somalia and Uganda and was at one point
touted as the official language of Africa.

The Swahili Coast
•Despite the shared history and language of the peoples on the coast, it remains
difficult to describe a solidified Swahili culture.
•Basically, it is a mixture of Arab, Indian and Bantu influences that created one of
the most developed trade networks in the Indian Ocean.
Not surprisingly, Swahili economy is linked to the Indian Ocean. For about 2,000
years, Swahili merchants have acted as middlemen between eastern and central
Africa and the outside world. They played a significant role in the trade of ivory
and enslaved peoples that climaxed during the 18th and 19th centuries.
Trade routes extended across Tanzania into the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Goods were brought to the coast and sold to Arab, Indian and Portuguese
traders. Many slaves sold in Zanzibar ended up in Brazil, which was a Portuguese
colony at one time.

Swahili Culture/Architecture
• Islamic Architecture in many places were as a result of influences of
conquest as long as 700 years ago.
• In Islam, Mallams, apart from being teachers are also designers of
buildings – mosques and Islamic learning centers using their
knowledge of geometry, calligraphy, numerology to produce visually
and spiritually effective works.
• Many of these buildings were influenced by designs in Mecca and
Madina, the two Islamic sacred centers in the world.
▪ Through trade and migrations, the Swahili established a long chain of
Islamic towns that stretched along the coast of Mogadishu (Somalia
today).
▪ One of the most elaborate of all Swahili buildings is the great mosque
of Kilwa: It has no minaret or central courtyard. It was built on rough
chunks of fossilized coral (a type of lime stone) imbedded in a type of
cement made of crushed and weathered fragments of the same stone.

The Great Mosque, Swahili, Kilwa, Tanzania, 8th-15th centuries, coral limestone.
Ruins of an early mosque built at Kilwa, a town on the coast, evidence the adoption of Islam
by at least the 8th century. The original structure was a simple rectangular prayerhall.

Interior, The Great Mosque, Swahili, Kilwa, Tanzania 8th-15th centuries, coral limestone.
The original pillars were octagonal columns each carved from a single coral stone. Coral
stone has a lime content that hardens with water and saturates the porous coral to create
concrete. The mihrab is located on the back wall.

The Great Mosque, Swahili, Kilwa, Tanzania 8th-15th centuries, coral limestone.
By the 12th century, the mosque had been entirely roofed with rows of stone domes
alternating with barrel vaults.

The Great Mosque, Swahili, Kilwa, Tanzania 8th-15th centuries, coral limestone.
A long anteroom connects the prayerhall to a square room measuring four meters across
which carries the great dome. This dome is thought to be the first true dome on Africa's
east coast. Like the columns, it was decorated with dressed coral panels. It was the largest
dome on the East African coast until the 19th century.

The Great Mosque, Swahili, Kilwa, Tanzania 8th-15th centuries, coral limestone.
To the west of the prayer hall was an ablution court. This sunken courtyard contained a
tank, a well, and a washroom, as well as large round sandstone blocks set in the floor to
exfoliate the feet after washing. The observance of ablution, the cleansing of the body
especially the hands and feet, was important to these Muslims. The Islam practiced by
Swahili peoples is often very strict. Most of the requirements of the religion are practiced.

The Great Mosque, Swahili, Kilwa, Tanzania 8th-15th centuries, coral limestone.

The 15th century extension made the Great Mosque at Kilwa the largest covered mosque on
the east coast of Africa. The pointed arches resemble those in North Africa, yet they were
constructed differently.

Shards of a red-coated glass bowl were
found set into a fragment of masonry
which may have been a decorative
element of the mosque or one of the
surrounding tombs.
The woodwork of the doorways and
window frames and shutters has not
survived.

Pillar Tomb at Kilwa, 15th century.

The Great Mosque, Swahili,
Gedi, Kenya, mid-15th century,
coral limestone

A better-preserved mosque exists in the 15th century town of Gedi in Kenya. Archaeological
findings date the first mosque structure to about 1450 and the subsequent revisions to
about 1500 and 1550 respectively. Gedi was an opulent town residing within an inner wall,
containing a palace, three pillar tombs, and a great mosque as well as several smaller
mosques and private houses. Lying four miles inland and two miles from a navigable creek,
Gedi was undoubtedly influenced by Swahili culture but probably did not participate
directly in the trade that linked towns along the Swahili Coast. Perhaps it acted as a wealthy
suburb, away from the main urban centers on the Swahili coast.

The Great Mosque, Swahili, Gedi, Kenya, mid-15th century, coral limestone.
A few hundred meters from the palace stood the Great Mosque. Constructed of stone, the
roof was covered with coral tiles laid in lime concrete. A broad-bladed spear, a Swahili
symbol of kingship, was carved into its entranceway. The mosque’s form is based on a
rectangular plan with entranceways on its long sides.

Mihrab, The Great Mosque, Swahili, Gedi, Kenya, mid-15th century, coral limestone.

Pieces of fine-grained coral were used in the mihrab decoration. It is more elaborate than
the mihrab described at Kilwa’s mosque. The façade of the Gedi mihrab was situated within
a rectangular frame with a pointed arch architrave.

The Great Mosque, Swahili,
Gedi, Kenya, mid-15th century,
coral limestone.

Gedi was abandoned in the 16th century, reoccupied for a short time, and then permanently
abandoned in the early 17th century. Archaeologists puzzle over why Gedi's residents
abandoned it, but can offer no definitive answers. Possible reasons for its downfall include
a Portuguese or Galla attack, a decrease in water tables that eliminated the water supply,
or some sort of epidemic.

Swahili Tombs
• As in many Muslim cultures, the Swahili often place tombs near a mosque.
• A pious man spends most of his time in the mosque, the cemetery and the
madrasa, since all these places are suitable for prayer and meditation.
• Swahili tombs are not merely the focus of religious meditation; instead
they are also tangible expressions of a family’s ancestral heritage, which
allows the living to celebrate their ties with the dead.
• Tombs honour the men and women who established a Swahili city, and
who are believed by the Swahili to have brought the purity and civilization
to a pagan land.
• Tombs are a social covenant even if those buried below cannot be
remembered. Some of the oldest tombs were erected in the Swahili
heartland, the coast of southern Somalia and northern Kenya.
• These tombs are ornamented with square or rounded columns.
• These “pillar tombs” were the basis of inspiration of later stone
monuments built in several Swahili cities.
• The pillars of some of these sixteenth-century tombs from Kaolo, near
Bagamoyo, Tanzania, rise to a height of about twenty feet.
• Some of these pillars are carved in relief with blind windows and doors as
if they were the houses of the deceased. Some pillars were inserted with
porcelain bowls, just as in the niches of Swahili houses to display Chinese
ceramics.

Swahili Tombs

Tombs, Swahili, Mombasa, Kenya, 16th – 19th centuries, coral limestone.
Grand tombs were constructed for deceased political and economic leaders and founders
of the community. Such men and women were believed to have brought the purity and
civilization of Islam to this pagan land. A lot of diversity exists in the style of these tombs.

Swahili Tombs

Pillar Tomb at Pemba, Tanzania, 10th century

Several tombs contain niches for
the display of fine porcelains and
other goods left to honor the
ancestors. Niches in Swahili homes
were also used to display
porcelains. Many of these tombs
have tall pillars, some rising 20
feet, with relief carvings and blind
windows or doors as if these were
houses for the deceased.

East Africa Swahili Visual culture - Siwa horn
▪Some of the regalia and symbols of office from this brief period include carved wooden
drums and magnificent side-blown horns carved of ivory or cast in brass.
▪The horn, siwa, of the city of Pate on Pate Island is formed of three great carved elephant
tusks. It is a creation described in the chronicle of that city.
•
•

•

This siwa is carved of ivory and cast in
brass
It is formed of three great carved
elephant tusks, its creation is described in
the chronicle of that city.
It is part of the regalia and symbols of
office still seen after colonization by the
Omani Arabs in the 19th century and the
Europeans in the 20th.

A man sounding a siwa,(side- blown horn),
Swahili, from pate island, Kenya,
17th century

East Africa Swahili Visual
culture - Siwa horn

This is one of the largest siwa owned by the
Sultanate of Pate Island. Another large siwa
is owned by the Sultanate of Lamu. During
times of war, the sound of such horns
would encourage warriors to fight harder.

Siwa, Swahili, Pate Island, Kenya, ivory.

East Africa Swahili Visual culture - “chair of power” or kiti cha enzi
A “chair of power” or kiti cha enzi represents the
culmination of several centuries of development
in Swahili furniture. The austerity of pre-18thcentury chair decoration gave way to the
flamboyance of 19th-century designs,
culminating in the kiti cha enzi. This parallels the
development of architecture we’ve discussed.
Elaborate chairs were passed down through
generations and those currently in use may be
several centuries old. A kiti cha enzi is
distinguished by its angular form, ebony wood
frame, elaborate string panels, and ivory or bone
inlays.
This chair has tiny pieces of ivory inlayed on the
back and arms.

Kiti Cha Enzi, “chair of power”. Swahili,
wood, ivory inlay and string.

Domestic Dwellings - Jumba
• By the fourth century, the patrician elders who
ruled the most powerful Swahili states lived in
homes constructed out of stone.
• The stone house is called the jumba, and is closely
identified with a noble past, family honour,
ancestry and prosperity.
• While Swahili mosques are reserved exclusively for
men, a jumba is the domain of women and the
focus of their religious and social activities.
• The tradition is that upon the engagement of a
daughter, a father constructs for his daughter a
stone house. This may be on top of his own house
or more appropriately his wife’s.
• If there are relatives living nearby, the upper
stories may be connected by a bridge, wikio.
• Servants usually occupy the ground floor so that
the female owners of the house can live in the
better ventilated upper floor rooms.
Narrow Street and Bridge between
Jumba, Swahili, Lamu, Kenya, coral
limestone

Domestic Dwellings - Jumba

Carved exterior doors depict the same elaborate
motifs found on the interior. Such carving is time
consuming and expensive; it was an art form only
the most elite families could afford.
Woodcarving reached its zenith in the 19th century
with the emergence of Zanzibar as the capital of a
commercial empire based on external trade and
clove production during Omani rule.
The earliest door dates to 1700.
Carved Doorway of a Jumba, Swahili, Zanzibar,
Tanzania, coral limestone, 19th Century. Wooden
doorframes, coral masonry.

Domestic Dwellings - Jumba

Carved Doorways of Jumba, Swahili, Zanzibar, Tanzania, coral limestone,
wood

Domestic Dwellings - Jumba

Details, Carved Doorways of Jumba, Swahili, Zanzibar, Tanzania, wood.

Domestic Dwellings - Jumba
A wall with gates, opened only during the
daytime, protected coastal towns. Except for
Lamu, these towns suffered much damage from
repeated attacks. Thus, surviving architecture
in Lamu provides the best insight into early
residential styles.
These stone houses, or jumba, have long,
narrow rooms clustered around an open
courtyard.

The more elaborate houses are multi-storied
and resemble a small fortress, having no
outward-facing windows. The houses were
designed to protect and to impress.
Houses would also be linked by second story
bridges and internal passageways not only
adding further protection, but also presenting
an image of a united front to any outside
group.

Domestic Dwellings - Jumba
The most common decoration on
these houses today is the
plasterwork found around doorways
and interior windows.

Decorated entryways served as
indicators of wealth and status. They
were characteristic features on
prominent homes in many Indian
Ocean towns.
The entrance to the jumba is through
a small porch that leads to the street
called a daka, meaning niche
Interior of a Jumba, stone house,
showing Zidaka, storage niches,
Swahili, Lamu, Kenya, 18th-19th
century, carved coral limestone,
lime plaster

Domestic Dwellings - Jumba
Entranceways were initially carved in stone,
then carved in wood. Now carved in plaster.
Plaster motifs range from stylized leaves, ropes,
chains, fish scales, zigzags and fluted patterns.

These styles are a blend of indigenous, Arabian,
Persian and Indian designs. Several belong to
the fishing trade, as the craftsmen also carved
boats.
Privileged guests were invited into the open
courtyard, kiwanda.
Family guests and family members were invited
into the house proper, misana (msana, s). Beds
may be placed here and screened with curtains.

Interior of a Jumba showing zidaka, Swahili,
Lamu, Kenya, 18th-19th century, carved coral
limestone, lime plaster

Domestic Dwellings - Jumba

Zidaka set into the wall of
the ndani, Swahili, Lamu,
Kenya, coral limestone, lime
plaster

The reception room leads into the first room called the ndani. It is a cool private room
occupied by the woman for whom the jumba was built. The most valued objects, like
carved beds and Chinese porcelain plates, were displayed in the ndani. Not only were
these objects reflective of status, but also they served as protective charms. Protection
was needed in this room because it was here that marriages were consummated and
bodies were prepared for burial. These were times when a man’s purity would be most
vulnerable.

Domestic Dwellings - Jumba

Zidaka in an ndani, Swahili, Lamu, Kenya, coral limestone, lime plaster

The ndani would have the most elaborately carved plaster zidaka. Zidaka are
intentionally shaped like mihrab niches. These are also considered protective charms.
Together the porcelain displayed and the niches into which they are set protect the
individuals within the ndani.

Cosmopolitan
influence

The Old Dispensary,
Hashan Virjee Patel,
Zanzibar, Tanzania, 18871891.

As a cosmopolitan trading centre, the cities of the Swahili culture developed multicultural
populations and a coresponding hybrid of architecture.
A prominent and immensely wealthy Muslim Indian businessman, Sir Tharia Thopan,
commissioned the Old Dispensary in Zanzibar from architect Hashan Virjee Patel. The
foundation stone was laid in 1887 to mark the jubilee of Queen Victoria.
Thopan's intention was for it to be used as a hospital, however, he died before it was
completed and the building was sold off after a family quarrel.

The Old Dispensary,
Hashan Virjee Patel,
Zanzibar, Tanzania, 18871891

The trustees who purchased the building set up a dispensary with a pharmacy and a
resident doctor on the ground floor. They subdivided the upper two floors into apartments.
This mixed use of the building continued until the revolution in 1964, when the inhabitants
fled the island and the dispensary was abandoned.

The Old Dispensary, Hashan Virjee
Patel, Zanzibar, Tanzania, 1887-1891

It passed into government ownership and control. The building was badly neglected over the
next 30 years. Damp and misuse took a heavy toll on the timber and plaster. In the 1990s,
the structure was renovated and converted into the Stone Town Conservation Center.

The Old Dispensary,
Hashan Virjee Patel,
Zanzibar, Tanzania,
1887-1891

The Old Dispensary, hailed as a symbol of multi-cultural Zanzibar architecture, is an
astonishing hybrid of styles. The ornately carved wooden balcony is characteristic of Indian
buildings in the town. The screens are loosely based on those from Egyptian and Arabian
homes. The fanciful gables may have been inspired by late 19th century European folk
architecture.

Detailed of parts of the Old Dispensary, Hashan Virjee
Patel, Zanzibar, Tanzania, 1887-1891

Arabic
calligraphy

The Swahili used a variety of art forms in their religious and secular life. Visual arts
include painting, sculpture, pottery, embroidery and weaving. Islamic influence is
evidenced through the lack of figural decoration. The emphasis is placed on geometric,
vegetal and calligraphic design.

Qur’an, Swahili, Early 19th Century. Ink and Pen on paper, bound in leather. Pate Island,
Kenya, early 19th century, ink and pigment on paper, bound in leather.
This Qur’an was probably made on Pate Island in Kenya. This town excelled in the
production of manuscripts as well as embroidery and fine furniture. Black and red ink was
used to write the sacred text, while yellow would be added to ornament the page. Like the
carved frames around doorways, the text is encased. Large letters or phrases would be
enlarged and framed in either box-like frames or …

Qur’an, Swahili, early 19th century, Pate Island, Kenya, ink and pigment on paper,
bound in leather
…more imaginative ways, almost like a doodle. Similarly, blocks of text were placed
outside the main margins turned on their sides or placed diagonally. These were
comments the artist made on important points they wanted the reader to remember. The
artist was a religious leader as well as a painter and calligrapher.

Other arts and
influences

Detail, Chest, Nubian,
Egypt or Sudan, c. 375400, wood, ivory inlay

The use of ivory or bone inlay has a long history in East Africa. This detail from
a chest dates to the 4th century. Notice the bosses on this chest; these same
conical projections were carved into Swahili door frames.

Kofia

Muslims wear the kofia to emulate Muhammad and his companions who were never seen
without their heads being covered. Covering the head has a long tradition in East Africa
prior to the arrival of Islam.

Wearing the kofia not only projects the image of a devout follower of Islam, but also it
serves as a reminder to the wearer to be more like Muhammad and therefore obey and
follow his preachings.

Kanga
Swahili women are known for the printed
cloths they wear, called kangas. Kangas
are rectangular printed cloths sold in
matching pairs.
Each has its own “name” or slogan
written in the Ki Swahili language in the
same place in every design.

Woman wearing Kanga, Swahili,
Kenya

Kanga

Guinea fowl
Kangas appear to have been worn first in the 1860s in
Mombasa. A simple black on white design was block
printed on white cotton cloth. The name “kanga”
came from a local black and white spotted bird, the
guinea fowl. As time passed, traders began to import
specially-printed cloths from India. A larger range of
colors was available, borders grew more elaborate,
and eventually the distinctive format of a central
motif and a message underneath emerged.

Kanga

The kanga was the first factory-printed
cloth to be imported in the East African
coast. Introduced in the late 19th
century, it was probably imported first to
the fashionable urban center of Zanzibar.

Today kangas are produced in textile
mills in Tanzania and Kenya in addition
to being imported from India and some
from Europe.

Today, kangas are worn by women of all faiths among the Swahili speaking peoples and
play a major role in all the major life cycle ceremonies in a Swahili woman’s life – birth,
puberty, marriage and death. They may also be used for the most mundane of functions. It
is this ambivalence that makes kanga cloth almost emblematic of multi-faceted Swahili
society.

Kanga

Early Kanga with jina, Zanzibar
The proverbial inscriptions, or jina, which are printed on the lower third of the cloth,
appeared around 1890. They were printed by English, Dutch and Swiss textile printers, later
also in India and Japan, and after Independence locally in Kenya and Tanzania, too.

Kanga

“The Grace of God Has No End,” Kanga, Swahili, Kenya and Tanzania, 20th century,
cotton.

Kanga

A woman wears a kanga for others to see, respectively a woman is seen to wear a certain
kanga and understood to communicate. Or, a kanga may be given as a gift, usually at
certain occasions such as marriage, the birth of a baby, religious festivals, or as farewell
tokens for someone traveling.

Kanga and global icons

Political figures in Kanga

While the jina often formally conform to poetic ideals, their content may touch on topics
not approved of by society, such as sexuality and love, jealousy and quarreling. Today
women of all classes wear kanga, although the contexts in which and the way they do so
may differ.

Like many other African cloths, kangas too have entered the modern global fashion world.
Clothing tailored from these cloths are paraded down Western-style runways,

SUMMARY
• We have conducted a survey of some of the
important art works in the northern parts eastern
parts of Africa mainly;
–
–
–
–
–
–

Rock art
Egyptian pyramids and their artistic content
Christian and Islamic architecture
Tombs
Domestic Swahili architecture
Other visual art forms of Swahili culture on the east
African coast.

UGRC 221
AFRICAN ART, ITS
PHILOSOPHY AND
CRITICISM

Week five

WEST AFRICA
The Akan (Asante)
Bamana
And
Dahomey Kingdom

West Africa

Who Are the Akan – political organization
•
•
•
•

•

•

The Akan occupy the southern parts of Ghana.
They comprise various sub-groups – Fante, Asante, Kwawu, Akyem, Akuapem, Akwamu
etc.
An Akan political unit is organized around families.
The family is headed by abusua panyin, group of families forming the smallest unit or
village is headed by odikro, a town by Ohene, and a group of towns form a paramount
state headed by an Omanhene. A group of paramount states is headed by a king such as
the Asantehene.
Various reasons account for the appointment of chiefs
– Warrior role
– Royalty
– Religious reasons
– Reward for excellent service
Akan Chiefs serve as
– Chief priests
– Political leaders
– Warriors and military leaders (Commanders-in-chief)
– Supreme judge,
– and they have Economic and social roles

Who Are the Akan? – social system
•
•
•

Akan chiefs co-exist within a modern political system through House of chiefs but
have restricted powers.
They are a matrilineal group.
Every Akan belongs to one of the seven matrilineal clans (abusua)
– They are Asona, Anona, Twidan, Aboradze, Ntwea, Konna and Adwenadze.
– Every Akan also belong to one patrilineal ntoro group called bosumpra, Bosomayesu,
bosumuru etc.
– Each clan has a common symbol or totem (an animal which played some significant role
in their mythology or history).

•

•
•
•
•
•

They believe humankind is made up of three parts;
– The mogya, blood, inherited from the mother,
– Ntoro, character, from his/her father, and
– Sunsum soul, from God.
Inheritance to office is by matrilineal reckoning.
Land is vested in matrilineages.
Many important political offices is inherited through matrilineal lineages.
In the past they practised clan exogamy.
The Akan practise polygamy, and they also practice cross-cousin marriage.

•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

Who Are the Akan? – religious beliefs and practices
The Akan believe in a Supreme Being called Onyame as the creator of the
universe, omnipotent, all-wise, all-powerful, and the source of life and
death.
Associated with the sky, sun, brightness, and the circle.
Regarded as a spirit, and therefore no images of Him are made. Prayers
are offered to Nyame both in private and at public functions.
The Akans also revere the spirit of the earth, known as Asaase Yaa, as a
sacred spiritual entity and symbolises “femininity:” motherhood, provider,
gentleness and care.
Special days are set aside for her, and on such days there is no farming or
fishing.
The Fante believe in the existence of ancestors.
Black stools represent ancestors, and are venerated.
The Akan make offerings to other spiritual beings called abosom.
They are supernatural entities or deities who derive their powers from
Nyame.
The abosom receive offerings of sheep, chickens, drinks and food.
Abosom are believed to inhabit objects such as rocks, trees, forests and
rivers
Lesser spiritual forces called suman (man made charms or magical objects)

•

•
•
•

Who are the Akan - festivals
Akan calendar is marked by a forty-two day adae cycle. Nine cycles make a
complete year.
Each adae is marked by religions rites and activities.
Every eighth adae marks a year and celebrated by a festival.
An Akan festival is an annual communal celebration of the year to
commemorate. Some of the festivals
– mark the end of farming season and usher in a new one
– offer new food crops – maize, yam, etc. to the gods and introduce this new food
crop for consumption.
– offer food and drinks to the gods and ancestors.
– plan for the coming year.
– mourn the dead.
– durbar to give account of the year and display wealth and beauty

• Included in some of the activities are planning for the coming year, mourning
the dead in the past year, and an account to the people by their chief.
• Above all it is an important artistic celebration.

ASANTE ROYALTY AND ART
•
•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•

The Asante are a sub-group of the Akan.
Asante kingdom was founded about the end of the seventeenth century by Osei
Tutu with the help of his priest friend Okomfo Anokye.
They emerged from a number of states which had been established around the
radius of the modern city of Kumasi known as Kwaaman by various matrilineal
groups and families who had migrated from the Adansie-Amansie, the cradle of
the Asante people.
The first batch of states included Tafo, Otikrom, Amakom, Anyinase, Kaase
Second batch included Atasomanso, Amoafo, Essumeja, Ofinso, Denyaase, Edweso
etc. founded by the Bretuo, Aduana and Asona clans.
Oyoko clan migrants founded Kumasi.
Many of the earlier states were absorbed through conquest, diplomacy, marriage
or a combination of all three.
By 1680 all these states had been conquered by the Denkyira and their common
hatred for the tyrannical rule united them to fight the Denkyira.
By 1700 they had united to form the Asante confederacy.

ASANTE ROYALTY AND ART
•

•

•

To preserve the unity of the confederacy Osei Tutu promulgated a number of laws,
– Not to disclose the origins of anybody
– Recognize the head of Kumasi state as Asantehene
– Kumasi the new capital of the Asante union, and
– An annual odwira festival where chiefs come to swear and renew allegiance.
To seal this Okomfo Anokye conjured the golden stool as a symbol of unity and the
pre-eminent stool for the whole of Asante.
– It became the visible symbol of unity and repository of national spirit
transcending all local ties, and a mystical bond.
To ensure effective power, political survival, rapid expansion, and continued
independence, Osei Tutu and Okomfo Anokye devised a politico-military
constitution
– Governed by a council headed by Asantehene, as also the supremecommander
– Members of the council were war chiefs (Krontihene and Akwamuhene) and
other military wing chiefs.

ASANTE ART AND REGALIA
•
•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

Asante took advantage of existing human and natural resources in the form of
wood, and gold, and skills in carving and smithing to support chieftaincy.
Asantehene and other chiefs became the main patrons and promoters of art.
Set up craft villages such as Ntonso (Adinkra cloth), Krofofrom (brass casting),
Bonwire (kente weaving) and Ahwia (wood carving).
Stools, spokespersons’ staffs, sandals, swords, head bands, jewellery, musical
instruments were used by chiefs as chiefly adornments and regalia.
Chiefs have specific sub-chiefs responsible for their regalia such as Mpaboahene
(sandals), Abanasehene (clothing), Mponponsuohene (swords), Nkowdwahene
(stools).
No other chief could use an art work or regalia used by Asantehene.
Asante accumulated a rich source of regalia also from war spoils.
Took ritual objects and war gods as trophies to add to their aura and power.
Asantehene brought in weavers and other craftsmen to work for him.
The celebration of Asante art and creativity is seen in the celebration of
installation rites, festivals and funerals.
The Asante were great borrowers and innovators of art and incorporated several
from other places by conquest or voluntarily.

AKAN REGALIA
•

Among the several Asante regalia are
– Stools, skins
– Footwear
– Palanquins
– Umbrella and finials
– Spokesperson’s staffs
– Swords
– Clothing
– Sandals
– Headbands
– Jewellery
– Etc

• In the following slides you will see a variety of Asante regalia adorned, or
displayed in other forms of usage.

STOOLS

Asante Golden stool
The pre-eminent art work of the Asante. The symbol of Asante unity
and collective spiritual power. This is also called the sika dwa Kofi. It
has attached to it bells and the three figures.

Asipim Chairs
Asipim, means, “I stand firm”.
These are locally made chairs
which have no spiritual
significance.
These chairs followed a single
line of development from
seventeenth century
European prototypes.
These are low armless chairs
with a slightly reclined
backrest and decorated with
patterns made out of tacks
and locally made brass finials
on the upright part of the
back rest with stamped,
incised, and repoussé brass
strips

An Asipim chair, Kuntananse, 2004.

Asipim Chair

Asipim chair being carried in a
procession at the Adaekese durbar,
Kumasi Sports Stadium, 2004.

ASANTE PALANQUIN

An undecorated woven Asante palanquin made out of plant fiber, 2004.

ASANTE REGALIA

Assorted blankets used in covering the palanquin, Kuntananse, 2004.

Umbrellas
•
•
•

Umbrellas are large canopies to protect the head of the chief from the sun.
There are different types used for funerals and the celebration of festivals.
On top of them are tops carved in different proverbial languages, clan symbols or non-verbal
statements called ntuati.

Umbrella Tops - Ntuati

Umbrella tops are symbolic works placed on top of the umbrella
communicating different messages.

Spokesperson’s Staffs
•
•

•

Akyeampoma, spokespersons’ staff, is the official insignia of the okyeame,
spokesperson, as well as a symbol of the okyeame’s status as spokesperson,
counsellor and advisor.
The office of okyeame is ascended to by inheritance, with a few exceptional
persons attaining it on personal merit. He is expected to modify and present the
messages of the chief and elders in public.
He is the visible intermediary between the chief and those who wish to speak to
him.
–

•
•

•

Dabehene or Nfoahene, a minor chief responsible for a chief’s regalia, and orders the
akyeampoma. There are a vast array of akyeampoma. Some are used for rituals and
others for ceremony.

The ceremonial akyeampoma carry proverbial motifs and are often covered with
geometric designs and gold leaf.
They announce in non-verbal form the arrival of a chief. The bearer of
akyeampoma need not always speak, for the symbols on the akyeampoma are
intended to communicate.
These carry a minimum degree of spiritual power as compared to the asempa ye
tia from other places. These staffs are intended to “envelope” and enhance the
institution and ceremonial aspect of chiefship as well as a chief’s aesthetic
appearance.

Spokesperson’s Staffs

The finial to the right is “If your hands are in a meal you are not left out”.

Swords
• There are two principal types of swords
– Ceremonial, and
– Ritual

• Swords consist mainly of three parts
– The blade
• This is usually made out of metal. This may be made by
cutting, piercing or both, and usually incised with lines with
symbolic designs on it.
– The hilt
• This is made up of a the grip and the pommel which prevents
the hilt from slipping through the hand.
• This is further crowned by a knob or a cone.
• Usually made of wood and wrapped with goldleaf with a
variety of geometric line on it.
• Swords are of various designs and used for several purposes.

Swords
– The sheath
• The blades of many swords are encased in sheaths or
scabbards, but usually from the skin of various animals.
• Sometimes various symbolic art works are attached to
the sheath.
• May be a cast or carved and plated symbols
communicating a message.
• The ceremonial swords are used to accompany a chief at a
public ceremony, durbar, etc.
• Ritual swords are used in swearing oaths of allegiance to a
chief and in other ritual situations.

Swords
A sword bearer displaying his
sword during the 2004
Adaekese festival, Kumasi
Sports Stadium, 2004.
The abosodee, symbol Bemu
or Kra Kwame, a bunch of
palm fruit, means the individual
kernels are to the palm fruit as
the Asantehene is to his
ancestral heritage.

Ntakerakye, Feather hat

Soul bearer of Asantehene wearing the
ntakerakye, feather hat, during the
Adaekese festival, Kumasi Sports
Stadium, 2004. It consists of eagle’s
feathers tied to a leather helmet with
gold and silver talismans

Clothing and Adornment

Nana Wiafe Akenten III, Omanhene of Offinso Traditional Area and Nana Serwa Nyarko,
Offinsohemaa, seated at the Adaekese festival, in full regalia, Kumasi Sports Stadium,
2004. Please take note of his headband, neck wear, armbands, bangles and rings.

Clothing and adornment

Detail
Nana Wiafe Akenten III, Omanhene of
Offinso Traditional Area, Adaekese, in
full regalia for the durbar, Kumasi
Sports Stadium, 2004. Please take note
of his headband, neck wear, armband,
bangles and rings.

Clothing and Adornment

Detail
Nana Serwa Nyarko, Offinsohemaa, Adaekese, Kumasi
Sports Stadium, 2004

Clothing and Adornment

A chief wearing a headband covered with cocoa pods. This is likely to
mean he is either a cocoa farmer, has cocoa farmers or his land is fertile.

Clothing and Adornment

Hats. Kuntinase, 2004. These are usually used for funerals,
on sad or serious occasions.

Clothing and Adornment

A chief’s hand adorned with rings and wrist wear

Clothing and adornment - Sandals
•

•

•

•
•

A group of a chief’s sandals, Kuntinase, 2004.

Sandals, mpaboa, are worn by
the a chief.
Thy are important part of a
chief’s regalia, as his sacred feet
and personality should not
touch the ground.
He constantly keeps on his
sandals.
Its forcible removal from his
feet in public destools him,
hence its importance.
A chief’s sandals sometimes
have symbolic decorations on
their straps intended to act as a
non-verbal form of
communication expressing one
idea or the other.

Clothing and adornment - Sandals
•

Paramount chiefs have specially assigned minor chiefs,
mpaboahene, within his gyaase, household, to be
responsible for his sandals. Some may bear symbolic works
expressive of his status. They are worn primarily to protect
the chief’s feet from touching the ground.

• Mpaboahene is the official in charge of the different sandals
worn by the chief. It is his duty to select the appropriate
sandals accompanying the chief’s cloth.

• Sandals with cocoa beans worn by a chief may represent
the wealth of the state is derived from cocoa.
• Similarly, a snail symbolises contentment; apese, hedgehog
symbolises “a feeling of total ownership,” and a snail and
tortoise symbolise peace and patience.

Clothing and adornment - neckwear

Kuntinase, 2004.

Clothing and adornment – armbands and headbands

Kuntinase, 2004.

Military Accoutrements

Items in this photograph include guns, ammunition pouch,
animal skin, caps, knives and gunpowder containers.

Military Accoutrements

A warrior displaying his military
regalia made up of animal skin cap,
and a gun among others.

Executioner

An executioner, Adaekese, Kumasi Sports Stadium, 2004.

Musical Instruments
•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

Music is of great importance to Akan chiefs.
The procession of a chief, rites of passage, funerals and other celebrations are all
accompanied by music and dance.
Musical forms include different types of tunes for sacred, solemn, sad and happy
occasions. Musical instruments, namely, ivory horns and drums are decorated in
several ways.
There may be other historical drums in a chiefs’ regalia which were acquired or
seized. Chiefs have in their court, musicians who play various instruments for
different occasions.
On some of these drums may be several types of decorations, including skulls of
enemies.
Drums are used for communication and entertainment. They are played to herald
the arrival or movement of a chief. Some musical instruments such as the talking
drum (atumpan) and fontomfrom are reserved only for the chiefs’ drummers and
musicians to play.
Some drums are taken to war whilst others in a chiefs’ regalia may be played for
the chief to dance in public.
Drums are made out of a single hollowed out wood often with waterbuck skin or
sheepskin as drumhead.
The wooden parts of some royal drums are also decorated with relief, spoils of war
and other religious objects.
There may be other musical instruments made of horns and bells in the collection
of instruments reflecting the importance of music to the Asante and to the artists
as well.

Royal drums being played during the burial ceremonies
of the late Asantehene, Otumfuo Opoku Ware II

Fontomfrom drums, Kuntinase, 2004.

Atumpan drums, Kuntinase, 2004.

OTHER ART WORKS
Adinkra symbols
• Adinkra symbols are believed to have originated from carved designs on
the sekyedua, or column of the stool of Adinkra, an Akan chief, who ruled
in about the early parts of the nineteenth century
• Adinkra are geometric symbols used in stamping cloth called adinkra
cloth.
• Adinkra stamps are made from fragments of old calabashes with small
sticks leading from the stamps to a point, which enables them to be held
between the thumb and the fore finger.
• These have become important symbols used in various forms.
• Stamped plain cloth with adinkra designs is known as adinkra cloth and
originally used as mourning cloth among the Akan.
• White background with black stamped adinkra cloth may be worn on
joyous occasions and a dark background used for sad occasions or
funerals.
• A few are adinkrahene, king of adinkra, Gye Nyame, unless God, Nyame
dua, God’s tree, aya, fern, meaning I am not afraid of you, nsaa, meaning,
nea onnim nsaa na oto ago, (translated as he who does not know the real
nsaa, a kind of coarse cloth made from camel or horse hair, buys a fake
one). This is meant to extol excellence and discourage satisfaction with
second rate. Nyame biribi wo suru, na me nsa nka, God there is something
in heaven, let me reach it (fig. 8), and several more.

Adinkra symbols

Nyame biribi wo suru, mame nsa nka “God there is
something in heaven, let me receive it

Adinkra symbols

Mate Masie

OTHER ART WORKS
Adinkra symbols
• Now adinkra cloth with white backgrounds and other bright
colours are used for outdoorings and on other joyous
occasions. Adinkra designs have interesting meanings.
• Designers have taken advantage of the multiple designs and
meanings of these symbols and used them in various ways.
• Today, several of these symbols are incorporated into the
logos of companies and gowns of prominent public figures. A
few examples are;
– Robes of the Speaker of parliament.
– The academic gowns of the Chancellor and Vice Chancellor of the University of
Ghana.
– On every product certified by the Ghana Standards Board is the adinkra
symbol hwemudua, meaning rod, symbolising belief in the best that can be of
everything – abhorrence of imperfection.
– The crest of the University of Ghana includes “dwehinimmen” (ram horns), a
symbol of humility and strength, wisdom and learning.
– The cassocks of some catholic priests, interior decorations of hotels, churches
and private homes all have adinkra symbols as part of the design.

Goldweights
• Merchants from the great Sudanic commercial centres, such as Timbuktu
and Jenne including Mande craftsmen called Numu (blacksmiths, brass
casters and goldsmiths), came to trade in gold among the Akan, and were
also responsible for the skills transfer through the settlements they set up
where they traded.
• The weights for weighing gold were initially seeds and stones and other
materials, and later brass weights were introduced from outside the Akan
areas by these merchants.
• These gold merchants and traders devised an efficient and systematised
way of trading by introducing cast brass, an alloy of copper and zinc weights
to weigh gold.
• The successful gold trade then compelled the Akan to adapt the Islamic
weight standards, which became the weighing standards for selling gold
probably before the fifteenth century until sometime in the mid-nineteenth
century with its manufacture declining in the 1900s.

Gold weighing equipment

A collection of spoons and weighing scales used in the gold trade

Goldweights

Early period pyramidal and hexagonal weights.

Goldweights
• In the Akan trade with the Europeans namely the Portuguese, Dutch,
Danish and English trading companies on the southern coast they also
adopted European weight standards such as the British troy ounce and
Dutch troy grains as part of the weights for gold trading.
• The Akan learnt the brass casting technique, adopted and adapted it into
their culture and over the next five centuries evolved from simple
geometrically shaped weights to include an assortment of figurines and
containers. The principal methods for the production of weights were
namely; the cire perdue “lost wax” method, direct casting, hollow casting
and modelling of brass sheets.
• PLEASE VISIT THE IAS EXHIBITION ON “KUDUO: THE AKAN ART OF BRASS
CASTING”, AND WATCH THE ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTARY.
• Through these works the Akan have demonstrated great skills in the
production of a wide variety of works in brass which have became a
hallmark of their craftsmanship. They used cast brass works as weights in
the sale of gold and several other forms of exchanges.

Goldweights
• Brass works were used in market transactions, in the payment of fines,
bride wealth and as fare for the journey of a deceased person into the
spirit world.
• They were also used in collecting tolls, including those using the trade
routes and European ships anchoring off the coast, as levies imposed in
times of war and ground-rents at European forts and castles, on elephant
hunters, gold miners, finders of treasure trove, those who wished to buy
their freedom after being found guilty and sentenced to death, and
offenders under customary law.
• Though the number of brass casters has significantly reduced, today both
traditional and contemporary cast brass works are produced for the local
urban and international markets.

Goldweights
• The Akan produced cast brass works also to represent symbols
and proverbs.
• Each trader owned a set of graduated counterbalances which he
or she used in trading.
• It was also once believed that there was a relationship between
specific geometric shapes and weights, but that idea has been
abandoned as it has been found out that no such relation existed
between shape and value.
• They include cast weights, weighing counterbalances, scoops,
spoons, sieving containers, human figures, animals, fruits and
vegetables, food crops, padlocks and keys, bowls, mugs, pots,
pans, calabashes, money chests, musical instruments, military
equipment and regalia.
• Today there are a wide variety of works produced and used in
several traditional and contemporary contexts such as door
handles, curtain hooks, chains, bracelet, decorative pieces etc.

Cast brass container

•The term goldweight is
loosely applied to cast and
sheet brass works.
•Among this variety are
cast containers called
kuduo, in which precious
items such as gold were
kept.

Kuduo, cast brass container.

• Forowa, modelled from
stamped, incised and
repoussè imported brass
sheet in cylindrical shapes
with removable lids for the
storage of cosmetics among
others.

Forowa, sheet brass container used
in storing lotions and similar
materials.

Goldweights

An assortment of swords and hilts.

Goldweight

Assorted cast goldweights in a variations of stylized fish

Bamana or Bambara
• Mande-speaking

Among the Bamana, farming is considered to be a noble profession – in fact
the noblest. Religious practices and beliefs glorify agriculture.

Bamana art is made by the smith caste. These people traditionally manage all
metal, wood, and clay production. They are both respected and feared for the
powers they wield, essentially using heat and fire to change the nature of
things, associated with the spiritual powers called Nyama.
A blacksmith is called a numu, or numuw for plural. Metal work is significant
among the Bamana because it is made by the numuw, and is made of metal
taken from ore in the earth and transformed by heat.
These works have nyama, thus possessing a spiritual charge for altars or
graves, as well as for sanctuaries or to be used by religious associations.

Bamana art is associated with three aspects of their
lives namely:
•Sacrifices

•Dances
•Festivals

Religious Associations
jo [jow, plural]
•Bamana religious life and the social structure is traditionally based on a
system of organizations called jow.

•These initiation societies are political, judicial, religious and philosophical in
nature. They are secret in the sense that the members are provided with a
knowledge that is not known to those outside the society.
•The jow bear the responsibilities of maintaining social, spiritual, and economic
harmony in the traditional Bamana community. They are major factors in social
cohesion.
• In each association, sculptures are affiliated with a wide range of activities.
•The jow were important forces of social organization - binding whole village
populations together in a sort of universal brotherhood and giving them a
relation to the supernatural forces, and to the gods.
• Bamana religion in general is concerned with increase, and its most important
rites are directed toward aiding and controlling the fertility of nature.
•Therefore these secret societies beliefs and practices overlap and interlock,
and produce a fusion of society and a unity of metaphysical and religious
belief.

Each Jow has a special altar called

Boli. The boli is a combination of
elements that represent water, air and
fire. It is composed of an armature of
wood with components of mud, blood,
and a variety of herbal and animal parts.
It is activated by nyama and mystical
substances, spiritually charged with
blood sacrifices.
In its manufacture, each member of the
group provides a bit of himself through
saliva.

Boli are made in a
variety of forms and
sizes.

Boli, Bamana, Mali, wood encrusted with spiritually charged materials.

Boli, Bamana, Mali, wood encrusted with spiritually charged materials.

Boli, Bamana, Mali, wood encrusted with spiritually charged materials.

Gwan Association
•Gwan is an association that is part of Jow dedicated to
women who have had difficulty conceiving, delivering, and
rearing healthy children.
•It initiates girls.

•This is a training period of seven years culminating in a
climactic ceremony involving ritual death and rebirth of the
candidate.
•Performances are then staged with songs and dances and
displays of art forms.

Gwan Association
•These female figures on this slide are

known as Gwandusu.
•Gwan meaning hot, hard and difficult,
and Dusu meaning soul, heart,
character, passion, fire and courage.
•They don’t fit the stereotype for
Bamana images.
•They are more naturalistic and softly
rounded.
•They portrayed both men and women
of status, and they were endowed with
signs of rank.

Gwan Association
The male consort is called

Gwantigi, who is
considered to be the first
blacksmith.

This is a personification of
masculinity, a heroic ancestor.

Gwandusu,
Bamana, Mali,
wood

Gwantigi,
Bamana, Mali, wood

For annual Jow and Gwan rituals, the sculptures are removed from
their shrines, cleaned and oiled, decorated with cloth and beads, and
set up in the village square as a group. The mother and child and her
male counterpart are seated in central positions of honor,
distinguished by attributes of their extraordinary physical and
supernatural powers.

Iron staffs, called bisa nege
[rods of iron] or kala nege
staffs of iron], are used on
altars and on graves and are
also manipulated in the
context of initiations and
funerals.
They are charged with nyama,
spiritual energy and power.
Sacrifices made up of millet
beer and other drinks are
offered to them.

Staff with Equestrian
Figure, Bamana, Mali, iron

The Ci Wara Association
ci wara
or
tyi wara
•Tyi, meaning farming
•Wara, meaning wild beast

Pair of Ci Wara masqueraders,
Bamana, Mali

The Ci Wara Association
The Ci Wara association is tied to the myth of the being Ci Wara. He was half
man, half beast.

In the ancient past, Ci Wara taught humankind how to cultivate their land. He
was the offspring of the first beings created, a woman and a snake. He tilled
the ground using his claws and a wooden stick, and through magical means
transformed weeds into corn and millet. It taught man to do the same. Under
its guidance, humans became good and prosperous farmers.
But, when grain became plentiful, men became wasteful. They were less
conscientious than they had been in less prosperous times. In despair, Ci
Wara buried himself in the ground. Man regretted its disappearance and his
wasteful actions.
To appease Ci Wara, they created an object to house his spirit - the boli. Each
Ci Wara Jo has its Boli. The Boli's prestige increased over time with
supernatural powers and achievements.

They also made headdresses to represent
it, and to call to mind his memory and its
virtues.
Today, Chi Wara is generally known to have
something to do with agriculture, but its tie
with this legend has been lost in some
areas.

Ci Wara Crest Mask, Bamana, Mali

Ci Wara Masqueraders, Bamana, Mali, 1905-6.
Danced in male/female pairs

There was a ritual nature to the
dance. It was intended to invoke the
blessing of Ci Wara on agriculture.
The Ci Wara dance was first
presented in private rituals, then
eventually in the fields.

Now the entire dance, as well as the
organization, has assumed a nonreligious character. It encourages
men to be good farmers.

In many areas today, the idea of Ci
Wara belongs to a mutual aid group
called fla-n-bolo or fla-n-ton.
Within the group, there is a spirit of
rivalry and the undertaking of
communal farm work.
Originally, it seems to have been an
initiation dance into the Ci Wara Jo.

Horizontal Ci Wara Crest Mask, Bamana,
Mali, wood, fibers

Vertical Ci Wara Crest
Mask, Bamana, Mali, wood

Kamalen - ton

The Bamana today have a young men’s associations called ton. There is no
caste or ethnic differentiation here. Anyone may participate, including all
casts—griots, farmers, and smiths. They undertake public work such as
clearing public places, markets, constructing and maintaining roads, dams,
bridges, and provide emergency relief. They also provide entertainment with
masks, puppets and plays, and there is competition among the various troupes
in these entertainments.

Performance of Kamelon-ton, Bamana, Mali, 1989.

Yayaroba performance, meaning, beautiful woman

Performance of the
Sigi, the buffalo
masquerade

Dahomey Kingdom

Now in the Republic of
Benin

Fon

By the late 17th century Dahomey was a
major power, raiding her neighbors for
slaves to sell through coastal
middlemen to European slavers. By the
beginning of the 18th century, some
20,000 slaves per year were sold from
Great Ardra and Ouidah, located on the
coast.

The profits made from the slave trade
and fertile farmlands kept the kingdom
stable. The kings enjoyed long reigns
during which they exercised great
political power, supported by local
priests and religious beliefs.
The kingdom was well-organized with
systems in place for taxation,
information gathering and military
conscription.

Slave Trade

King Wegbaja
(c. 1650-1685)
King Akaba
(c. 1685-1708)
King Agaja
(1708-1732)

For 150 years the kings of Dahomey dominated the Slave Coast. A tightly
organized bureaucracy took absolute control over internal affairs, and continual
warfare expanded the boundaries further. The king concentrated his efforts on the
court at Abomey. A highly centralized royal organization then developed.
Until well into the 19th century, Dahomey continued to expand northward and to
sell slaves, despite British efforts to end the trade. A constant supply of slaves
was assured by war, and the slave trade thus intensified the wars, which were to
become a Dahomean way of life. One European remarked that Allada was so
diligent that they could deliver a thousand slaves a month.

Until 1900, the king was the ultimate
judicial, military and political authority.
Also, he was the high priest who
confirmed all the village priests and
lineage heads.
Annual wars not only provided slaves
for the trade, but also provided
additional troops to make up for losses.

Dahomey King, print by European
visitor, 1790s

Thus, several different ethnic groups
were absorbed into the Fon culture.
Other captives were sacrificed in the
elite ancestor cults.
Thus, the king had absolute power – he
had the means to maintain order among
the population and gain wealth.

Divination Tray, Aja or Fon, Kingdom of
Dahomey, Republic of Benin, before 1659,
wood

Fon society was a blending of cultures over a long period of time. Yoruba
influences from the east played an important role. Ewe and Akan groups from
the west influenced it. The most notable art forms were associated with the
monarchy.
Like the Yoruba, the Fon used art to praise and reinforce royal authority and
to address superhuman forces. A divination process known as fa, the Fon
equivalent of the Yoruba ifa, largely determined art forms and subject matter.
The ongoing use of divination and the reciprocal relationship of Fa, the god of
divination, and Legba, the god of change, worked together to make change
itself an important aspect of Fon life and art. Fa is the Fon equivalent of the
Yoruba god Orunmila. Legba, shortened from his full name, Eshu-Elegbara, is
the Fon equivalent of the Yoruba god Eshu.

Divination Tray, Aja or Fon, Kingdom of Dahomey, Republic of Benin, before
1659, wood

Upon taking the crown, a Fon king was given a
unique sign that had been divined for him. The sign
was known as his fa name or strong name.
Verbal images drawn from the great body of oral
literature surrounding that name were translated
into art forms that enhanced the glory of the court
and the magnificence of the palace.
Artists in the royal city of Abomey were organized
into palace guilds according to the medium in
which they worked. Members of the textile workers’
guild designed pavilions, canopies, umbrellas, and
banners embellished with symbolic appliqué
designs.
Metal workers constructed images of deities and
symbols of state in iron and brass and may have
produced small ornamental figures and tableaus for
the aesthetic pleasure of the elite.
Wood carvers created metaphorical portraits of the
king and symbolic sculpture based on their fa
names.

Dahomey ceremony and
military parade, print by
European visitor, 1790s

Cloth, as in other West African kingdoms, played a major role in the drawing of
attention to the court and to powerful chiefs. There were pavilions of cloth,
state umbrellas, and banners, somewhat like flags. In addition, caps and
clothing may be treated with appliqué motifs. For the most part these were all
made of imported cloth.

Appliqué Umbrella, Fon, Republic of Benin, during King
Glele’s reign (1858-1898)

Appliqué cloth work was not for sale on the market, but it had to be
commissioned. It was sold to anyone who could purchase it. At first this
included the king and members of the royal court. This postcard depicts such
men wearing skirts, many of which employ the appliqué technique. In addition
some wear beaded necklaces, sashes and hats, and many carry weapons.
Notice that two men wear imported Western hats.

Large Wall Hanging in a room
in palace, Abomey, Dahomey,
Republic of Benin, appliqué
textile

Not only was appliqué used on umbrellas and clothing, but also for banners
which hung on court buildings, religious shrines and as flags. Subject matter
was important. These cloths often referred to proverbs but they could as
easily refer to incidents in the life of the family. Many referred to past kings.
The compositions are schematic with a seemingly arbitrary arrangement of
forms. The buyer determined subject matter. Patterns were kept on hand and
the pieces were arranged to "fill in space" and to create an environment even
if it was not necessary for the story, which was being presented.

Appliqué Cloths
This and the subsequent slides
are examples of Fon appliqué
cloth and their content.

Hierarchical scale
King / attendants
Fon Chief with his Cap, Umbrella,
Retainers and Litter, Dahomey,
Republic of Benin, appliqué textile

Wall Hanging devoted to King Agadja, Dahomey, Republic of Benin,
1727, appliqué textile

Banner, Fon, Dahomey, Republic of Benin, 1856, cotton.
King Guezo (1818-1858)

King Guezo (1818-1858)

The symbols include
•Fa sign = bull

•Scene of a battle he won,
and a
•Stool

Wall Hanging devoted to King Guezo,
Dahomey, Republic of Benin, appliqué
textile

King Glele (1858-1889)

The symbols include
•Fa sign =lion

•Scene of a battle he won
•Stool

Wall Hanging devoted to King Glele,
Dahomey, Republic of Benin, appliqué
textile

King Behanzin is usually
represented on banners as a
shark with an egg. This relates
to the proverb “The world
holds the egg which the
ground wants.”
Glele's son, Behanzin, reigned
from 1889 until his exile by the
French in 1894.

Conflict with the French led to
Behanzin’s downfall. He was
taken to Martinique where he
died.

King Behanzin, 1892

Wall Hanging comprising emblems of
the Kings, Dahomey, Republic of
Benin, appliqué textile

Appliqué of the twelve Kings of Dahomey, 1997

Bocio
Sculptural forms, bo, were considered
empowered objects in Dahomey. They were
believed to work in conjunction with the
energies of the gods, vodou, to protect
against evil, sorcery, illness, theft, and to
provide power and success. Bo took on
various shapes.
Those created to represent a figural form are
generically known as bocio. These figures are
placed at the village entrance, the courtyard,
the house, or a shrine serve a protective
function.
There is no mythology, ritual complex or
priesthood associated with them. They seem
to operate through the power of medicines
contained within them. Neither person nor
particular spirit are represented, merely a
repository for a spiritual force.

The bocio used by commoners and those used
by royalty serve similar purposes, yet their
aesthetic is markedly different.
The bocio of commoners are disorderly, rough,
and incomplete; they seem to be concerned
with an anti-aesthetic.
Empowering materials, generally secreted
inside royal bocio, are here often attached
outside, in full view.

Bocio for a commoner, Fon, Dahomey Kingdom,
Republic of Benin, wood, bones, shells, fiber

Royal Bocio

Bocio in Honor of King Glele

Bocio in Honor of King
Behanzin

Empowered by special materials
added to the surface or secured
inside it. Life-size sculptures
such as this were believed to be
able to walk and talk like humans.
According to oral history, this
figure with a sword in hand was
carried in a cart into battle to
create an image of royal fury and
strength. This sculpture stands at
5’7’’.
Proverbs embedded in Glele’s
praise poetry include “No animal
displays its anger like a lion.”

Bocio in Honor of King Glele, Sosa
Adede, Fon, Dahomey Kingdom,
Republic of Benin, late 19th century,
wood, brass and silver

Bocio known as Agoje, Akati Akpele Kendo,
Fon, Kingdom of Dahomey, Republic of Benin,
1858-1889, iron

Summary
• Different forms of art used in different contexts have been
discussed.
– Asante art concentrated on the history of the kingdom, and
how it appropriated art from other ethnic groups to enhance
its power of appearance of the king and his bureaucracy.
– The variety of art that formed Asante regalia.
• The importance of Jow Associations which binds the Bamana
society together cemented by various art works in different
forms and in performances and rituals.
• Among the Dahomey, their art is influenced by some of the art
from their Yoruba and Ewe neighbours.
• How Appliqué cloth recalls the power of Dahomey kings and a
number Bocio, empowered by special materials to host spiritual
forces, made in hounor of the king.

UGRC 221
AFRICAN ART, ITS
PHILOSOPHY AND
CRITICISM

Week Six
SOUTHERN AND CENTRAL AFRICA
Kongo Kingdom
Kuba
Great Zimbabwe
Nguni and Ndebele

Learning Objectives
• Distinguish between the different art forms
in these regions and its people.
• Examine the reasons for the creation of some
of the art works.
• Point out the specific art works related to a
cultural period.
• Demonstrate a clear understanding of the
reasons for the production of the selected art
works in this region.

The Kongo Kingdom
• One of the best known and studied political units in Africa is
the Kingdom of Kongo.

• The Bantu speaking populations from the northwest of the
region began to move into the area known as the Kongo
Kingdom during the first century AD.
• The lower Congo, includes portions of the Republic of Congo,
the Democratic Republic of Congo and Angola, with subgroups
such as the Vili, the Yombe, the Sundi and the Kongo. The Kuba
lived to the east of the Yaka, the Uku and the Pende.

• Sometime during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the
area became crowded with pastoral ethnic groups who
needed more land for their larger flocks and herds. This
started a wave of migration that lasted for more than a
hundred years.
• During the period of mass migrations and wars of expansion,
some of the more stable ethnic groups in the Congo region
established notable kingdoms.
• A ruler named Nimi Lukemi founded the Kingdom of Kongo
towards the end of the 14th century.

• At the height of its power it extended over modern Angola,
as far east as the Kasai and Upper Zambesi rivers.

DRC

The Kongo Kingdom was one of the largest sub-Saharan kingdoms between the
16th and 17th centuries; spanning over 115,000 miles. It had a highly centralized
monarchy as well as a powerful noble class. The urban nobility sustained its
luxurious lifestyle through a heavy tax system levied on the rural peasant class.
Bulk products from the provinces, including copper, salt, wild animal products
(hides and ivory), as well as cloth and later slaves, were traded to the Portuguese.
Conversion to Christianity solidified these important trading relationships.

When the Portuguese explorer Diego Cao found the mouth
of the Congo River in 1482, he found the flourishing
kingdoms of Kongo and Loango. The Portuguese and the
Kongo soon began diplomatic relations, which included
sending Kongo nobles to visit the royal assemblage in
Portugal in 1485.
When the Kongo Kingdom was at its political apex in the
15th and 16th centuries, the king reigned supreme. He was
elected by a group of governors, usually the heads of
important families and occasionally including Portuguese
officials.
The activities of the court were supported by an extensive
system of civil servants, and the court itself usually consisted
of numerous male relatives of the King. Lesser relatives of
the King who were responsible to him often governed the
villages. All members of government were invested with
their power under the auspices of a ritual specialist.
Sceptor, Kongo Kingdom, DRC, 19th century,
ivory, iron, earth, resin

The Kongo Kingdom
• When a Portuguese expedition arrived in 1491 their Ambassador
kissed the king’s hand according to the custom of the Portuguese
court and brought assurances of friendship from John II.
• From the very beginning the King of Kongo was treated with great
respect by the Portuguese.
• The material they wove from was raffia which was fine enough to
delight John II of Portugal when he received some as presents
from the king of Kongo and were compared by the Portuguese
with silk and velvet.
• Masons, carpenters, and artisans came with the 1491 Portuguese
expedition furnished with all the tools of their trade, and in many
cases, their wives, bringing Portuguese cooking utensils along.
• The Kongo court was delighted so they quickly constructed a stone
church, and the King of Kongo was baptised. The King and Queen
took the names of Joao and Leonora after the king and queen of
Portugal.
• The capital itself was renamed San Salvador.

The Court of the King of Loango, Lower Congo, c. 1668
This early drawing of the court of the King of Loango, once a subsidiary of Kongo, tells us
that certain leadership arts were already in use – elaborately embroidered raffia textiles
(seen here in the rug and the hanging textile), an attire complete with leopard skins, and
a pole with several implements, such as flywhisks, to choose from. A bowing man offers
him several animal skins, elephant tusks, and bracelets. Musicians accompany the court
in the background with drums and horns. The power of the king and his court was
affirmed by a wealth of prestige objects and emblems.

The Kongo Kingdom
• In the next series of slides we shall
– Examine four principal artworks of the Kongo
people, namely;
– Nkisi,
– Textile,
– Funerary arts, Niombo, and
– Crucifixes and crosses

Nkisi
• Nkisi (plural Minkisi ) is important in the Kongolese religious beliefs. Minkisi are
tangible objects that contain spiritually charged substances that aid contact with
the dead and spiritual beings.
• They are basically objects such as vessels, gourds, shells, horns, carved works or
any other object that can be inhabited or possessed by spiritually charged
substances.
• In the Kongo, all these objects are called nkisi. Nkisi means “medicine”. The
Kongolese have specific sculptors, nganga, who create minkisi. These sculptors
are believed to be able to communicate with spirits.

• The nganga first create nude sculptures that are then covered in nails, cloth,
rope, etc. with the belief to be controlled by ancestral spirits. The nails bring
together the worlds of the dead and the living, creating an oath to heal an
individual, sealing a pact, or an oath. The powers of the dead "infuse the object
and allow the nganga to control it".
• In many figures a nkisi power figure is often shown with the piercing of sharp
objects including nails.
• The nails are believed to give the statue an ability to cause harm by protecting its
own and the spirit is believed to aid and reinforce the power of the nkisi.

• Historically, there were two types of nkisi, public and private.
• At the most basic level, the nkisi represents a container of empowering
materials or “medicines” called bilongo. The magical substances may be
blood along with animal, vegetable and mineral matter.
• The “medicines” are generally secured in cavities in the stomach, head
or back, to activate the work with the empowering agent.
• The nkisi, properly endowed with magic substances and additions by the
nganga or doctor, had the power to act in several ways.
•

There are four main types of nkisi, used for different purposes.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Nkondi are objects of ill omen, usually brandishing a spear or a knife,
Npezo are just as evil, but less menacing in attitude.
Na moganga are benevolent figures, which protects one against sickness
and dangerous spirits. They help the hunter and the warrior;
Mbula protects against witchcraft spirits.

• All nkisi can be used for a variety of purposes and their meaning is
ambivalent.

• The nkisi also may represent animals: double-headed dog or sometimes
a monkey.

Power containers hold
medicines or minkisi (nkisi,
singular).

Graves are also considered
minkisi.

Sceptors, wood figures, etc.
may be minkisi.

Nkisi, DRC

These are activated by
driving nails, blades and
other pieces of iron into the
figure. These are meant to
inflict pain on guilty persons.

An ivory sceptor for a Kongo ruler contains
spiritually-empowered substances, or
medicines, that were packed into a small darkcolored bundle on the figure’s head. The
substances and the object they activate are
called nkisi, or minkisi if plural. Ritually-invested
rulers were once considered to be minkisi, for
they were conduits for extraordinary powers.
The king depicted on this sceptor holds a staff of
authority in one hand and chew on a special
root held in his other hand. The root, a medicine
of chieftainship, is a mild drug expected to make
the ruler’s judgments impartial.

Sceptor, Kongo Kingdom, DRC, ivory,
iron, earth, resin

The motif of the elephant carrying the rooster
alludes to an ancient Kongo myth in which the
elephant is said to have carried the sons of the
great father Ne Kongo across rivers when they
dispersed within Kongo land.
Also, there is a carved female anklet at the
bottom. This signifies the Kongo desire for
balance between male and female elements.

Sceptor, Kongo Kingdom, DRC, 19th century, ivory,
iron, earth, resin

Textiles

This early 17th century raffia textile from
the court of Kongo provides evidence of
the Kongo court, which may have been
quite similar to the one depicted in the
drawing in the preceding slide.
In addition to such high-quality handmade
items as this, goods that had to be
imported, were thus were expensive, and
often served as symbols of status and
wealth.

Textile, Kongo Kingdom, DRC, raffia

The people of Kongo may have once used these lozenge designs in scarification. These are
images of a man from the late 19th century with lozenge patterns on his chest, while the
early 20th century photograph of the girl exhibits her lozenge scarification on her lower
stomach.

Raffia caps with
similar lozenge
designs were also
worn by those of
high status.

Funerary Arts, Niombo
• A funeral is basically a form of ritually distinct ceremonies by
various groups as a way celebrating or remembering the life of a
departed person.
• Many of the arts of the Kongo region have to do with honouring
and commemorating the dead and communicating with their
spirits.

• This interesting and complicated custom gave the dead the
opportunity to be commemorated with massive cloth offerings.
• The body of the dead is usually prepared over a lengthy period
of time, sometimes more than one year during which it is dried
and wrapped in special mats and locally woven cloths.

• Numerous cloths were displayed with it as a way of showing
respect in a very dignified way.

• The funerary rites of the Bwende people of the Kongo, transformed
their illustrious dead into ritually wrapped mummies called niombo.
• On the death of an important person such as a chief, mats and cloths
were collected.
• Niombo makers study the corpse carefully in order to note details such
as filed teeth or tattoo markings. This was to ensure that the work
became a symbolic portrait.
• The body is smoked, dried and wrapped first in fine raffia cloth mats,
then in brightly coloured cloths and mats.
• Hundreds of cloths may be used until a massive bundle swelled out.
• In ordinary burials among the Bwende, dancing and singing is very
important and rigorously builds up to a peak.

• This takes place for a number of nights in succession in the dead
person’s village and surrounding villages or communities.
• The dancing suddenly stops on the day of internment. After a feast,
the niombo is carried through the village and accompanied with a
special orchestra to the grave.

A European visitor to the region in the 18th century described a funerary procession for a
king. He said the body of the king was covered with mats and raffia cloth. Imported cotton,
linens, and silks were then wrapped and sewn around the king to create a large bundle
about 20 feet long X 14 feet high X 8 feet thick. This bundle was topped by a representative
head of the deceased ruler. This entire structure was placed in a wheeled cart, which was
pulled to the gravesite by more than a dozen men and followed by mourners.

Crucifixes and Crosses
• From the time of Joao I’s conversion until the 17th century,
Kongo leadership engaged in extensive communications with
religious and political leaders from Europe, including the
pope and other members of the Vatican, who accepted the
Kongo church as orthodox.
• The Kongolese initially doubted that Christ was crucified and
had difficulty accepting that Christ was nailed onto a crucifix.
• But with the connection between the nails on the minkisi,
and that on the cross it made more sense to the Kongo
people.
• In Kongo belief, the nails bring together the worlds of the
dead and the living, sealing a pact, or an oath.

Crucifixes, for example, became symbols for the
crossroads, a meeting place for the world of the
living and the world of the dead. The cross forms
and crossroads were a long-held Kongo belief.
Christian saints were also transformed in the
Kongo belief system. Saint Anthony of Padua was
renamed Toni Malau in the Kikongo language, and
he became popular in the 17th century.
The Portuguese-born Saint Anthony was
considered a protector of children and mothers,
and these images served to guard their Kongo
bearers against illness and other misfortunes.
Saint Figure (Toni Malau), Kongo Kingdom, DRC,
19th century, wood

Thus, artists were commissioned to create
works that were modeled after Christian
European forms, such as this crucifix.
Although these works have Christian
forms, they are conceived in a Kongo
style.
Except for a few crucifixes in forged iron,
most Kongo examples were cast in a
copper alloy. This crucifix depicts a Christ
figure and three additional figures. The
hands of Christ are flattened abstractly,
and the facial features are more African
than European. The three praying figures,
which would be unusual on a European
crucifix, are more abstract.
Crucifix, Kongo Kingdom, DRC, copper

Stylized Kongo crosses

In the 18th century, a young woman who was a
member of the royal family claimed to have been
possessed by the spirit of Toni Malau. She was
convicted of heresy and burned at the stake.
She apparently knew what her outcome would be
and hoped that her matyrdom would signal a
revival of the once-grand Kongo kingdom.
A religious sect formed to honor her, and they use
these figures of Toni Malau as instruments of
healing.

Saint Figure (Toni Malau), Kongo Kingdom, DRC,
19th century, wood

Right Saint Figure is depicted in the
typical European robes. The artist was
careful to render the folds of the cloth
and other naturalistic details, likely
from a European prototype. The
Christ child in his arms, however,
appears very African and seems to be
seated on a Kongo box throne and
carrying a flywhisk. Thus, Christ is
given the Kongo symbols of
leadership.
The Kongo Kingdom dissolved in
1665. However, Christianity remained,
but it was incorporated into the local
practices and underwent a
transformation that made Kongo
Christianity specific to the locals.
Left a local
reinterpretation of the
sculpture of Toni Malau

Right Saint
Figure (Toni
Malau), Kongo
Kingdom, DRC, 19th century, wood

The Kuba

The deteriorating environmental conditions and the dissolution of the
Kongo kingdom in the Atlantic region led to wide-ranging and protracted
violence as rival kingdoms competed for natural resources and political
dominance. The European demand for slaves encouraged persistent
warfare. Portugal contributed to the instability as it clashed with
neighbouring kingdoms to establish and expand Angola, a small colony at
the northwestern tip of the present country of Angola.

The eastern savanna witnessed the rise of the Kuba Kingdom and the
Luba and Lunda empires, three multi-ethnic states with advanced
political systems and rich courtly cultures. While the more isolated Kuba
kingdom did not have direct contact with European merchants at this
time, Lunda rulers actively encouraged trade by opening routes to the
coast.
The Kuba kingdom, bordered by the Sankuru, Kasai and Lulua rivers, was
a conglomerate of several smaller principalities of various ethnic origins.
Thus, the kingdom contains many subgroups within its boundaries, all of
which share similar culture and language.

Sometime around 1625, an outsider unseated a rival
ruler and unified the area's chiefdoms under his
leadership. This man was Shyaam a-Mbul a Ngoong Shyaam "the Great."
Kuba oral histories reveal that he was the adopted son
of a local queen who left his home to travel to the
Pende and Kongo kingdoms in the west. Empowered
by mystical knowledge of foreign customs and
technologies, Shyaam became the architect of Kuba
political, social, and economic life.
Advanced techniques of iron production and crops
from the Americas such as maize (corn), tobacco,
cassava (manioc), and beans were introduced. The
government was reorganized around a merit-based
title system that dispersed power and promoted
loyalty among the aristocracy. Although most Kuba
ethnic groups are organized into independent
chiefdoms today, they still recognize the authority of
the Bushoong king.
ndop of Shyaam "the Great“, Kuba, DRC, wood

This 1947 photograph shows the nyim,
king of Kuba, seated in his royal
sleeping house. Several prestige
objects are noticeable. The knives stuck
in the wall at the left are actually short
swords, a distinctively Kuba form of
weapon.
On the floor in front of the opening
into the sleeping chamber is a
wonderfully designed backrest, whose
rectangular face is covered with an
elaborate pattern based on overlapping
angles suggesting interlacing. Such
backrests, along with royal stools and
chairs, as well as the raised dais and
woven mats seen above, underline the
notion that the nyim must not sit
directly on the earth or to touch it.

Detail of Kuba nyim’s backrest Detail of a similar knife/short
swords used as weapons usually
stuck in the wall at the royal house.

The Bushoong people are the most
dominant among the Kuba and have
imposed their own culture and language
onto several nearby villages. The king of
the Kuba kingdom, referred to as nyim, is
always of Bushoong blood and is
recognized by every other subgroup.
Each subgroup within the Kuba carries
equal power and has a representative in
Bushoong court. All subgroups in the
Kuba kingdom are united by kingship and
honorary titles.

The reigning nyim in 1970, King Kot aMbweeky III (who has ruled from 1969present) in state dress.

Each subgroup possesses the same
ideological and political structures and
links between kingship and the spirits
that affect all aspects of life throughout
the Kuba kingdom.

At the apex of the hierarchy,
the nyim has the most
opulent garments.
The king often encouraged
his royal wardrobe specialist
to expand his collection of
royal costumes continuously,
maintaining them in a
special warehouse in the
palace.
The nyim wears a variety of
weighty and complex
costumes to indicate various
roles he fulfills.

The reigning nyim in 1970, King Kot
a-Mbweeky III (who has ruled from
1969) was photographed in state
dress. A raised dais covered with
skins of felines and cowries and
mats covered with geometric
designs separate the sacred king
from the earth.
To either side are drums of office,
covered with bead and cowrie
shell designs that mark his reign,
remind of his authority and
position. He sits almost immovable
in his massive costume, which
almost obliterates any real view of
the individual who fills the role of
king from those who see him.

The sumptuous garment is an
accumulation of some fifty
symbolic objects and weighs as
much as 185 pounds. The main
part is a tunic made of
interlaced strips of raffia cloth
covered with an abundance of
beads and cowries. Thigh pieces
and arm pieces of beaded
interlace strips exaggerate the
size of the king’s body.
A red skirt trimmed in cowrie
patterns covers the lower
portion of the body, while a
special raffia cloth belt some
eight to ten inches wide and up
to 13 feet long, completely
covered with cowries, wraps
around the waist.

Beaded and cowrie covered sashes,
bracelets, anklets, shoulder rings,
leopard skins and leopard skin bags
and satchels, and metal ornaments
add visual and actual weight to the
costume.
The headdress supports a massive
bouquet of feathers and long white
plumes in reference to the supreme
position of the king. A fringe of beads
covers the forehead, and an artificial
beard of beads and cowries encircles
the face.
Even the hands and feet are covered
with gloves and boots with cowrie
decorations and ivory nails. The
covering of the body with huge
numbers of cowries reminds us that
the nyim is a descendant of Woot, the
mythical first king and founder of
Kuba.

ndop
The Kuba created few figural forms other than the wellknown symbolic portraits of nyims, known as ndop.
This idealized representation of the ruler in hard wood,
shows him seated cross-legged on a rectangular base
decorated with patterns that are shared with special textiles
that allude to position. The base recalls the dais upon which
the king sits in state, and the sword of office in the left hand
reminds us of the weapons held by the actual monarch.
The costume represented on ndop is a greatly reduced
version, referring to only a few important ceremonial items
of regalia: crossed belts over the chest, a wide cowryencrusted sash around the waist, and cowrie shell
armbands, and the royal headdress. This is a special type of
crown with a projecting visor limited to the use of the nyim
or regents. Again, cowries remind us of the association of
the ruler with his mythical predecessor Woot.
ndop of
Shyaam "the Great“, Kuba, DRC, wood

In front of the figure of the nyim, projecting from the
base, an object known as an ibol serves as a symbol
of the individual king’s reign of office. The ibol of
Shyaam “the Great” is a game board representing a
game of chance and skill, one of the many amenities
of civilization said to have been introduced by this
culture hero about the same time he introduced the
custom of ndop.
In use, the ndop was regularly rubbed with camwood
and palm oil, giving it a reddish, glowing surface over
time. It served many functions. It may have played a
role in the installation of the king, and during his life
it is said to have been not only a portrait but also the
soul double of the nyim.

ndop of
Shyaam "the Great“, Kuba, DRC, wood

Supposedly, whatever happened to the king was
apparent in the figure that represented him. For
example, if the king was wounded, a scar appeared
on the figure. It was closely associated with the
king’s fertility and was kept in the women's
quarters, where it was placed next to his wives
during childbirth to ensure safe delivery.

Some claim that at the death of the king the life
force passed from the dying nyim to the ndop and
then to his successor during rituals of installation.
Thereafter, it served as a memorial and was placed
with his throne in a storeroom near his grave, to be
displayed on important occasions. Kuba traditions
maintain that if the ndop is damaged, an exact copy
is made to replace it.
ndop of
Shyaam "the Great“, Kuba, DRC, wood

Each king after Shyaam aMbul a-Ngoong theoretically had a ndop figure made.
The latest was carved for the ruler nyim Mbop Mabiine MaKyen, whose reign
began in 1939 and ended with his death in 1969. Many similar figures were
carved during his reign and have been produced since, not for actual use but for
commercial purposes.

Kuba cups
In the palace itself, numerous
special warehouses were distributed
throughout to store the treasures of
the kingdom.
These included objects in precious
materials such as ivory, copper and
brass, great numbers of royal
costumes and textiles, as well as art
objects of all sorts such as pipes,
spoons, cups for palm wine, boxes
for storing valuables and for
cosmetics.
Some of the most spectacular
objects are cups for palm wine. In
the 19th and early 20th century
wooden cups, with and without
handles, were carved and used by
numerous peoples across the region.

The ram horns sprouting from the head of this cup indicate that it belonged to
senior titleholders, again a reference to the royal prerogative of keeping of sheep,
which was occasionally extended to some members of the royal clan.

Despite the sculptural form of the cup, the predilection for two-dimensional
surface design is once more evident in the forehead scarification patterns and the
bands of patterning. Unfortunately, in most areas where these beautiful objects
were once created, plastic cups are now used for the drinking of palm wine.

Raffia textile
The production of fabrics among the
Kuba and the patterns associated with
them reflect Kuba ideas of social
creditability, ethnic unity, and religious
ideas.
The most important cloths that reflect
these ideas are those made of raffia
fibers, which seem to result from a later
technology than that of beaten bark.
Raffia textile production and design are
collaborative undertakings among the
Kuba.

Production of these textiles is a multiple-stage
process that involves the participation of
children, men, and women of the same clan.
The outer layers of the individual leaflets
provide the raffia fiber, collected by the men.
After the fibers are gathered and stripped by
hand or with the aid of a stripping comb, the
men also weave the raffia on a diagonal loom
into rectangular pieces of plain weave cloth
slightly more than two feet by two feet. After
weaving, the cloth units are sometimes dyed
and sometimes softened by repeated wetting
and pounding in a mortar.
Women then embroider or use the technique of
appliqué to embellish the clothes. They use
natural and dyed raffia fibers.

Kuba women finishing and decorating a raffia cloth

Raffia cloth played an extremely important
role in Kuba society in the past and is still a
reminder of loyalties, histories, and
relationships. Squares of raffia cloth were
once used as currency. It was a major
element in marriage contracts and legal
settlements. The wearing of Kuba-produced
cloth and the display of embroidered raffia
squares was an important element in court
ceremonies and funerals.
The most common use of the traditional
fabric today is in the funeral celebration.
Only raffia cloths are appropriate for the
burial of the dead. The body of the
deceased is dressed in a prescribed way in a
required number of textiles of varying sizes
and styles according to the gender of the
deceased. Multiple skirts placed on the
body are a mark of prestige.

The finished cloths are worn during
ceremonial events, primarily of a
funerary nature.
They are wrapped around the waist,
layer over layer, creating a voluminous
appearance. After death, the clothes are
also displayed on the body of the
deceased during mourning and buried
with the body at the conclusion of the
funeral ceremony.

Textile using cut-pile embroidery technique, Kuba, raffia

Textile using appliqué technique, Kuba, raffia.

The weaving of raffia cloth is a
continuing tradition among the
Kuba for traditional use or export.

The export cloth is generally of an
inferior quality.

Southern Africa

Zimbabwe used to be known
as Rhodesia, the name given
to it by Cecil Rhodes. He was
an English miner and colonial
politician who established the
diamond company De Beers.
Rhodesia separated into
Northern and Southern
Rhodesia, later after
independence, renamed
Zambia and Zimbabwe,
respectively. Today, the Shona
people are the dominant
cultural group of Zimbabwe.
This section will discuss the
Great Zimbabwe
archaeological remains and
the monolith with a bird
found in the ruins.

Zimbabwe

Great Zimbabwe
• The largest ancient stone construction south of the Sahara is known
as the Great Zimbabwe, located in Masvingo in southern Zimbabwe.
• This was built between the 12th and 15th centuries by the ancestors
of the Shona, one of Zimbabwe's many Bantu-speaking groups.
• In Bantu, Shona in Zimbabwe means "sacred house" or "ritual seat of
a king." Zimbabwe was an important trading centre and capital of the
medieval Zimbabwe state, and the city controlled much of the
interior of southeast Africa for nearly two centuries.
• The ruins cover nearly 1,800 acres and can be divided into three
distinct architectural groupings known as
– the Hill Complex,
– the Valley Complex and

– the Great Enclosure.

Great Zimbabwe
• At its summit in the late fourteenth century, Great Zimbabwe may
have had as many as 18,000 inhabitants occupying it. It was one of
some 300 known stone enclosure sites on the Zimbabwe Plateau.
• Given the sheer scale of Great Zimbabwe archaeologists have
been at a loss to explain its sudden appearance and
interpretations of the site pose a particular problem because it
was looted during the nineteenth century by treasure seekers.
• For this reason, Great Zimbabwe has come to serve as grounds for
one of archaeology's newest subspecialties, cognitive
archaeology, the science of penetrating the ancient human mind
to glean information about the religion, ideology and politics of
past cultures.

Plan, Great Zimbabwe, early Shona Culture, Zimbabwe, 1200-1450

Great Zimbabwe, early
Shona Culture, Zimbabwe,
1350-1450, stone.

Portuguese traders were the first known outsiders to encounter Great Zimbabwe
in the 16th century. They believed they had found the fabled capital of the Queen
of Sheba. Later travelers attributed the site's impressive stone structures to be the
work of Egyptians, Phoenicians, or even Prester John - the legendary Christian
king.
Such misguided and romantic speculation held for nearly 400 years until the
excavations of British archaeologists David Randall-MacIver and Gertrude CatonThompson early in the 20th century confirmed that the ruins were indeed of
African origin.

Great Enclosure, Great Zimbabwe,
early Shona Culture, Zimbabwe,
1350-1450, stone.

The people living in the hills of the Limpopo Valley were descendants of today’s
Shona people, one of Zimbabwe's many Bantu-speaking groups. One early
Shona group built an impressive stone capital or enclosure known today as
Great Zimbabwe. It was built and occupied in the 13th to 15th century. Great
Zimbabwe is the largest of the 150 to 200 stone ruins found in the Valley today.
The ruling class appears to have controlled wealth through the management of
cattle, which were their staple diet. At its apex in the late 14th century, Great
Zimbabwe may have had as many as 18,000 inhabitants, although the majority
lived at some distance away from the complex. Only 200 to 300 members of the
elite classes are thought to have lived within Great Zimbabwe's massive edifices.

Great Enclosure, Great Zimbabwe, early Shona Culture, Zimbabwe, 1350-1450, stone

The Great Enclosure was completed about a century after the Hill Ruin. A single
stone wall encircles the complex. Turrets and monoliths rise above some of the
walls, much like those found at the Hill Ruin.

Great Zimbabwe, early Shona Culture, Zimbabwe, 1350-1450, stone.

Great Zimbabwe was an important trading center and capital of the medieval
Zimbabwe state; the city controlled much of interior southeast Africa for nearly
two centuries. They traded with the Arabs in gold, ivory and slaves.

Walls, Great Enclosure,
Great Zimbabwe, early
Shona Culture, Zimbabwe,
1350-1450, stone

The walls were constructed from regular, rectangular granite blocks gathered
from the exposed rock of the surrounding hills. This rock naturally splits into even
slabs and can be broken into portable sizes. Therefore, it provided a convenient
and readily available building resource. All of the walls were fitted without the
use of mortar by laying stones one on top of the other. This is called dry stacking.
Each layer is slightly more recessed than the last to produce a stabilizing inward
slope. This same construction method was used on Djoser’s Funerary Complex.

Detail, Walls, Great
Enclosure, Great Zimbabwe,
early Shona Culture,
Zimbabwe, 1350-1450,
stone

The stones were fitted together closely and evenly over long, serpentine courses
to produce remarkably finished surfaces. With walls as high as 36 feet and
extending approximately 820 feet, Great Zimbabwe is the largest ancient
structure south of the Sahara Desert.

Walls, Great Enclosure, Great Zimbabwe, early Shona Culture, Zimbabwe, 13501450, stone.

Walls, Great Enclosure,
Great Zimbabwe, early
Shona Culture, Zimbabwe,
1350-1450, stone

The function of the stone walls has often been misinterpreted. At first glance,
these massive non-supportive walls appear purely defensive. Scholars doubt they
ever served a martial purpose however and have argued instead that cattle and
people were valued above land.
The walls are thought to have been a symbolic show of authority, designed to
preserve the privacy of royal families and to set them apart from and above
commoners.

Smaller walled areas are inside the enclosure. A narrow parallel passage, 70
feet long, is formed by the gap between the outer enclosing wall and a curved
inner wall.

Conical Tower, Great Enclosure, Great Zimbabwe, early Shona Culture, Zimbabwe,
1350-1450, stone

This passage leads to two stone towers, one of which is nearly 30 feet high today.
Their form is reminiscent of Shona granaries.

The Hill Ruin is the oldest and was constructed on a rocky hilltop overlooking the
sites in the valley below. The Hill Ruin incorporates a natural cave, whose walls
act as a megaphone projecting sound out toward the valley.

Great Zimbabwe
• In addition to architecture, Great Zimbabwe's most famous works of art are
the eight birds carved of soapstone found in its ruins.
• The birds surmount columns more than a meter tall and are themselves an
average of sixteen inches tall.
• The sculptures merge both avian and human elements, substituting human
features like lips for a beak and five-toed feet for claws.
•

Excavated at the turn of the century, it is known that six of the sculptures
came from the Eastern Enclosure of the Hill complex, but unfortunately
their precise arrangement can only be summarized.

•

Scholars have suggested that the birds served as emblems of royal
authority, perhaps representing the ancestors of Great Zimbabwe's rulers.

• Up in the front of the monolith climbs a slim crocodile with notched teeth.
Crocodiles are associated with kings in several southern African cultures,
for they are deadly and mysterious.
• Although their precise significance is still unknown, these birds remain
powerful symbols of rule in the modern era, adorning the flag of Zimbabwe
as a national emblem.

One of the eight soapstone birds
was discovered in the ruins. The
birds surmount monoliths more
than a meter tall and are
themselves on average about
sixteen inches tall.

The sculptures combine both
human and bird-like elements,
substituting human features like
lips for a beak and five-toed feet
for claws.

Monolith with Bird, Valley
Ruins, Great Zimbabwe, early
Shona Culture, Zimbabwe, c.
1200-1450, stone

This combination of human and avian elements has
led scholars to determine that the images are
meant to symbolize the early Shona kings of Great
Zimbabwe. Fish eagles live on the rocky hilltops
above sacred pools and holy caves just as Shona
kings once lived on the hilltops and made sacrifices
to the royal ancestors to the earth and in the deep
pools.
The high-flying eagles are liminal creatures,
meaning they can cross into two different
environments – the sky and the earth. Ancestors are
believed to also traverse the earth and the sky, or
the heavens.

Monolith with Bird, Valley Ruins,
Great Zimbabwe, early Shona
Culture, Zimbabwe, c. 1200-1450,
stone

The flight of the eagle is likened to a bolt of
lightning. Thus, these rain-bringing birds also recall
the Shona priest’s role to intercede with the
ancestors to bring rain to their people.
A crocodile with notched teeth climbs up the front
of the monolith. Crocodiles are often associated
with kings in several southern African cultures.
These animals are deadly creatures of the
waterways and pools, including those sacred to the
royal ancestors.
Two incised circles located beneath the bird appear
to be “eyes.” Perhaps these are the eyes of the
ancestors. The chevrons below evoke the zig-zag
pattern of lightning and the idea of the eagle’s flight
linking heaven and earth.

Close to the largest tower is a doorway leading to
a space dominated by a stepped, clay-covered
stone platform 25 feet wide. It’s believed that this
platform was used to display small soapstone
carvings in phallic form or some having breasts.
The wall near the platform is marked with several
bands of dark stone. It is difficult to determine the
purpose of this platform, but it may have been
used as an altar.

Another explanation likens these objects to those
in wood and clay used today by the Shona. These
small objects are given to girls in initiation camps
for instructional purposes. Thus, these sexual
symbols may have been connected with initiation.

Female Sculpture, Great Enclosure, Great
Zimbabwe, early Shona Culture, Zimbabwe, 12001450, stone

We have evidence from other sites
nearby of Shona leadership and
construction. These stone-faced
earthen terraces were built during
the 17th century by Shona rulers in
Naletale.

Stone Walls, Naletale, Shona, Zimbabwe, c. 1500-1700, stone

Nguni
Groups
Zulu
Ndebele

Zulu and Nguni Groups
• The Zulu are the largest ethnic group in South Africa living mainly in the
province of Kwa Zulu Natal. Some can be found in Mozambique, Zambia, and
Zimbabwe. In South Africa, they number around 10-11 million people. The
language Zulu, is of Bantu origin. The Zulu formed a powerful state in 1816
under the leader Shaka. Shaka, as the Zulu king, gained an extensive amount
of power and authority over the ethnic group and united what was once a
confederation of groups into an imposing empire under the Zulu Kingdom.
The Zulu people in South Africa today constitute one of the largest ethnic
groups in the country.
• The Nguni, a section of the Zulu, are also amongst the best-known groups in
the Zulu nation. The Nguni ethnic groups represent nearly two-thirds of
South Africa’s black population and can be divided into four distinct groups;
the Central Nguni (the Zulu-speaking peoples), the Southern Nguni (the
Xhosa-speaking peoples), the Swazi people from Swaziland and adjacent
areas and the Ndebele people of the Northern Province and Mpumalanga.

The Zulus believe that they are
descendants of a Congo chief who
during the 16th century migrated to the
South. By the 17th and 18th centuries,
the Zulu people were established in
Kwa Zulu Natal.

The famous ruthless Zulu king Shaka
ascended to power through force. He
ruled for ten years (1818-1828). In that
short period, he managed 250,000
people and could put 40,000 warriors
into the field.
Although he left a strong kingdom, the
British were able to overcome the Zulu
in 1879, ending the last resistance to
their rule over South Africa.

Utimuni, Nephew of Shaka, G. F. Angas,
1849

Shaka’s troops endured rigorous
training, e.g. Shaka required them to
go barefoot. Shaka also utilized newer,
better weapons.
In this European print, the dress and
adornment worn by Zulu royal warriors
are portrayed in detail.

Utimuni, Nephew of Shaka, G. F. Angas,
1849

Similar forms of dress are worn today
during special ceremonies and dances.

King Goodwill kaBhekuZulu

Zulu women also wear specific forms of
dress.
These married women wear small
beaded panels around their necks. These
would have been gifts.

Married Women, Zulu, South Africa, c.
1900, photograph

Young girls learned beadwork and the meaning of the
symbols and colors used by their older sisters. The
beadwork was usually worn as a head or neckband.
Beaded Panels are created by young women for their
adornment or as gifts for their male suitors. Given as
expressions of love, sometimes the girls use these
beadwork gifts to communicate information about the
status of the relationship between herself and her
suitor through certain color combinations and colors
of beads.
For example, lavender-colored beads are associated
with the saying “I envy the dove that picks up corn
grains near the door of your mother’s house,” which
means “I wish I was already married to you.” At other
times these gifts are simply tokens of affection.
These beaded ornaments are worn with pride. They
serve as displays of a young man’s popularity with his
girlfriend or girlfriends. Young Zulu people today
continue to give and wear these coded beadwork
panels on special occasions, usually attached to their
dresses or shirts.

Arab and Portuguese traders have
imported beads into Africa since the
16th century. Africans purchased glass
beads from Venice as early as 1500.
Beads were often controlled by the
chiefs and kings within their territories,
making beads a prestige item.
Sometimes beads were even used as
currency.

Thus, beads and beadwork have a long
history in Africa, and they are
associated often with ideas of status,
wealth, and accomplishment.
Some of the cultures that purchased
the most beads included those in
Nigeria, Cameroon, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, and eastern South
Africa, where the Nguni people live.

Young people today still receive gifts and wear small beaded
panels, usually attached to their contemporary clothing.

Leather aprons protect women during
pregnancy and lactation. The leather is
taken from a cow slaughtered by her
husband to appease the ancestors and
ensure safe delivery.
The crescent shape in the center may
refer to horns.

The metal studs in dense square pattern
at the bottom represents the motif
amasumpa, or warts, symbolizing herds
of cattle.
What do these materials and symbolism
tell us about the Zulu culture’s
philosophy?

Married Women, Zulu, South Africa, c.
1900, photograph

Amasumpa

Beer Vessel with Lid, Zulu, South Africa, terracotta, telephone wire

Beer Vessels with Lids, Zulu, South Africa, terracotta, basketry and telephone wire
caps

Today, women wear beaded
versions of leather garments.
Capes or shawls and blankets are
a popular garment worn by
women.
Men depended on female
relatives to explain the code.
They can see whether a woman
is engaged, married, unmarried,
has children, or unmarried
sisters.
The patterns and colors
communicate the region a
woman comes from and her
social standing.

A married
woman wearing
beaded capes,
Zulu, South
Africa

In this example, on the right,
letters (derived from motor
vehicle number plates) have
been added – not to spell
anything in particular, but just to
add visual interest to the work.

A married woman wearing beaded
capes, Zulu, South Africa

These shawls are created by
sewing several pieces of cloth of
varied lengths so they hang in
these layers. Each end of the cloth
is then given these beaded
panels. So, accumulation and
layering are literal in these forms.
Notice on this one, letters are
included and on one of the
horizontal panels, houses are also
depicted. Sometimes cars and
other industrial elements will be
used as motifs.

Beaded Shawl, Zulu, South Africa

We can see accumulation again in the
adornments worn by this Zulu woman.
The color scheme of opaque red, sap
green, white, black, and dark blue is
known as umzansi. Meaning, “people of
the lowlands.” This style reflected both
territorial and generational shifts, as
some groups moved to a new location in
the valley.
This woman wears a variety of beaded
adornments and large earplugs.

Woman in Beads and Earrings, Zulu,
South Africa.

Earplugs are worn as a Zulu identity
marker and as ornamentation and
adornment in situations such as
courtships and family celebrations by
both males and females.

Earplugs date back to as early as the
7th to 11th centuries when Iron Age
ceramic disks were used.
In later years, ivory, rare woods,
wood covered with vinyl asbestos
flooring, and presently, wood covered
with colored plastics.

Zulu headrest, wood

• The headrests are designed to cradle the neck and support the head.
• They protect coiffures and elevate the head for sleeping.
• Zulu headrests are thought to have been used as stools during the day and
pillows at night.
• The Zulu believe that sleep and dreams are the means of ancestral
intervention.
• The headrest would, therefore, be more than an ordinary pillow; it would be
an instrument of mediation between the worlds of the living and the
ancestors.

The Ndebele are a branch
of the Zulu who split from
King Shaka in the early
1820s under the leadership
of Mzilikazi, a former
general in Shaka's army.

Mzilikazi took his people
and livestock northwards
into present-day Zimbabwe
where they battled with the
Shona people. Today, the
Ndebele live mainly in
South Africa.
This section examines
Ndebele house paintings,
beadworks aprons and
shawls, and blankets.

The Ndebele

Interior, Painted House, Franzina Ndimande, Ndebele, South Africa

Ndebele women are known internationally for their beadwork and house
painting. Their mural painting is NOT steeped in prior cultural practices. The
painting began in the 1940s as a part of the struggle against Apartheid.

Painted House, Ndebele, South Africa

The Apartheid government forced groups of people, including the Zulu and
Ndebele, to move into “homelands,” which were restricted areas that delineated
boundaries between groups of different ethnicities. This kept the different
peoples from uniting against the Boers and the Apartheid government. In these
homelands, they were more easily controlled. In protest against the government
having ownership and control over one’s ethnicity, the Ndebele people decided
to paint the adobe houses they were forced to live in.

Painted House, Ndebele, South Africa

Ndebele houses often have a short wall surrounding it and a gateway. Some or
all of this may be painted in colorful geometric designs outlined in black.

Painted House, Ndebele, South Africa

Usually, the women begin with a pure white surface and apply rectangular
sections of a colorful motif. Some of these are geometric with no symbolic
meaning. Other motifs are more naturalistic and reflect the world around them.

Painted House, Ndebele, South Africa

Some of these depict aspirations, like desiring a large house or a BMW.

Interior, Painted House, Franzina
Ndimande, Ndebele, South Africa

The interiors are
painted in similar
fashion. Franzina
Ndimande painted
designs based on
razor blades and
elaborate two-story
buildings. The
modern industrial
world often features
predominantly in
these house
paintings as desires
for a better life and
to belong to the
global world.

Masanabo sisters at one of their Ndebele art panels at the High Commission

These bright and colorful paintings have received a lot of attention from tourists
and have been promoted by the old and new South African governments. Artists
like Ndimande, the Masanabo sisters, and Esther Mahlangu have received
international attention and awards, traveled outside Africa, and painted
canvases for sale to the international market.

Painted Automobiles, Esther Mahlangu, Ndebele, South Africa

Painted House, Ndebele,
South Africa

Among the most familiar visual traditions of southern Africa is the beadwork of
Ndebele women. Like house painting, their form of dress was created as a
means to reclaim their identity and is a relatively recent form.
For years tourists have been bused to these houses to view these paintings, but
also the unique dress adorning these women. Their beaded dress also
developed in the 1940s as a response against Apartheid.

Historical evidence suggests that Ndebele’s beadwork developed rapidly after
the Mapoch War of 1882 when white settlers in South Africa defeated the
Ndebele. They uprooted and relocated the Ndebele to different parts of
southern Africa.
However, the Ndebele maintained a strong group consciousness, and art
became one way in which they asserted their identity. Women started to
make and wear beaded clothing and ornaments as part of everyday dress.
Thus, the Ndebele proclaimed their cultural identity no matter where they
were.
Geometric patterns dominate Ndebele’s beadwork as it does in their mural
paintings. Women strive for balance in their compositions and harmony of
color.
Contemporary bead designs use motifs, such as houses, airplanes, telegraph
poles, car license plates, and the Roman alphabet that relate to modern life
and aspirations, as we also saw among the Zulu.

A wide variety of beaded garments mark the
transitions in women's lives. Upon her
marriage, a woman receives a plain apron,
called a jocolo, from the family of her groom.
Earlier aprons were leather, like this one.
Later, the jocolo were made from cloth or
canvas.
Jocolo consists of a rectangle with five panels,
which are referred to as "calves" and allude to
the woman's ability to bear children. After
her marriage, the woman embroiders the
apron with beads. The jocolo is worn only
after the woman has had children.

Jocolo, Ndebele, South Africa,
leather, beads

She sews imported European glass beads onto
the backing and arranges them in bold
geometric designs that evoke the shape of
Ndebele houses. In the apron, blue, green,
and pink beads contrast with the white
beaded background.

Nguba, Ndebele, South Africa, cotton, beads

Ndebele women are known as the people of the blanket. The nguba is the
marriage blanket. It was usually made from a blanket, which was
customized with elaborate beadwork by the owner throughout her married
life. It became a spectacular item as the woman continued to add
beadwork.

Nguba, Ndebele, South Africa, cotton, beads

The designs served social functions as markers of cultural identity and social
status. Initially, beadwork designs were dominated by a white colour field and
included only a few randomly placed geometric designs rendered in black or dark
blue. After the 1940s Ndebele’s aesthetics changed. Women began to include a
wide range of colors and packed their compositions with geometric and
figurative motifs from their everyday lives.

Nguba, Ndebele, South Africa, cotton, beads

For example, this nguba features letters, and schematic representations of
telephone poles and houses. The nguba is exclusively made and worn as a
cape on festive occasions by married women. In addition to representing her
social status, such heavily beaded capes testify to the wearer’s artistic
abilities, considerable financial resources, and high social standing given her
ability to dedicate numerous hours to creating artwork.

Like the Zulu shawl, Ndebele nguba is constructed from panels of cloth with
beaded horizontal bands. Motifs vary but often include aspirations for wealth
and modernization. One way to tell the difference between these two capes or
shawls is the multicolored vertical bands on the nguba.

Ndebele Nguba
Zulu Shawl

Today, Ndebele married women wear thick imported blankets that mimic
these same vertical color bands. Sometimes a woman will add beads to
these, but usually, these are not beaded.

In addition to the jocolo and nguba, Ndebele women wear a variety of
beaded bracelets, necklaces, headbands, and heavy anklets. It is the
combination of all these elements that communicates her status as a married
woman, wealth, and identity.

Today, many women are involved in the
tourist industry, making a variety of
beaded items for sale.
Among the most popular of these are
dolls that imitate the, now famous,
Ndebele dress. Still politically and
socially conscious, these dolls
communicate their Ndebele identity and
“femaleness” through dress.

Dolls, Ndebele, South Africa

Dolls and other colorful beadwork and
wire items made by the Nguni and
Ndebele groups are also being used to
educate their community about HIV and
AIDS prevention and treatment.

Summary

• This lecture has discussed eleven principal artworks and architecture from
the central and southern Africa sub-regions here. They are namely;
– Kongo
•
•
•
•

Nkisi
Textiles
Funerary arts, Niombo
Crosses and crucifixions

– Kuba
•
•
•
•

Kuba King, nyim’s adornment
Ndop
Cups
Woven fabrics and textiles

– The architectural ruins of Great Zimbabwe
– Ndebele
• Painted houses
• Zulu and Ndebele beadworks
• Ndebele blankets, aprons and shawls.

